Your Highness,
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you again to India. And I warmly recall our recent interactions in Kazan and in Riyadh before that.
2. Our two countries enjoy a longstanding friendship reflecting centuries old economic and socio-cultural ties. Under the guidance of our leadership we have witnessed deepening of our multifaceted bilateral ties across various domains. While we may be time tested friends, but our partnership is premised on progress, and focused on the future.
3. I am glad to host today the 2nd Meeting of the Committee on Political, Security, Social and Cultural Cooperation (PSSC) under our Strategic Partnership Council (SPC).
4. We have maintained a good tempo of high level engagements and coordination across the multilateral fora. The Indian community in Saudi Arabia is 2.6 million strong, and I take the opportunity to thank you for their welfare and comfort.
5. Our defence partnership has witnessed several "firsts” over the past few years – including the first ever Land Forces joint exercise 2024; and two editions of our joint Naval exercises. We had regular exchanges on training and capacity building. And our cooperation has now expanded in the field of defence industry & exports as well.
6. Our security cooperation has also grown steadily. We are collaborating in counter-terrorism, combating extremism, terror financing, and drug trafficking.
7. Saudi’s Vision 2030 and Viksit Bharat 2047 hold complementarities for our industries to build new partnerships. I am glad to note that our businesses are collaborating intensively. Trade and investment are important pillars of our partnership, and we are strengthening our collaboration in new areas including technology, energy, renewable energy including green hydrogen, connectivity, health and education.
8. We welcome efforts to promote culture, tourism and youth exchanges. And we see considerable potential for cooperation in the field of media and entertainment.
Your Highness,
9. Today we also have the opportunity to review regional and international situation. Saudi Arabia, we recognize, is an important force for stability in the region. The situation in West Asia is a matter of deep concern, particularly the conflict in Gaza. India’s position in this regard has been principled and consistent. While we condemn acts of terrorism and hostage taking, we are deeply pained by the continuing death of innocent civilians. Any response must take into account the international humanitarian law. We support an early ceasefire.
10. India has consistently stood for resolution of the Palestinian issue through a two-State solution. We have also contributed to the building of Palestinian institutions and capacities.
Your Highness,
11. Today we would have an opportunity to also talk about the G20, the BRICS, the IMEEC and other regional and global issues. It is clear from our discussions we had so far and we expect to continue, that we have a similar interest in preserving the stability of the region and in driving our economies towards greater prosperity. Our task forward is clear and I look forward to our continuing partnership and once again I welcome you.
I look forward to your remarks.
