Updated 25.02.2026 -
Published 17.02.2026
Bratislava, 17 February 2026 – The Slovak Republic continues to call for a fair and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on a two-state solution. Minister of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic, Juraj Blanár, confirmed this after today’s meeting with Varsen Aghabekian Shahin, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the State of Palestine. At the same time, he reported that the Slovak Republic has accepted an invitation through the position of observer at the newly founded Board of Peace. The head of Slovak diplomacy will represent the Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic, Robert Fico, at its first ever session on Thursday, 19 February 2026.
“We clearly hold positions that speak of the observance of international law, because this is the only thing that can ensure stability for us with the aim of achieving a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We currently see the comprehensive plan presented by the administration of US President Donald Trump as the only initiative that can bring about a peaceful settlement. This plan was supported by two resolutions of the United Nations Security Council – above all Resolution No. 2803”, said Minister J. Blanár while emphasising that the Slovak Republic will not join the Board of Peace as a member but has accepted the invitation to take part in its activities as an observer.
Following the discussion on peace initiatives, both partners condemned the Hamas terrorist attack that took place on Israeli territory.
“We agreed that the other side has the right to retaliate, but everything must be in compliance with international humanitarian law”, the head of the Slovak Foreign Ministry appealed.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian State praised Slovakia’s policy in supporting the Palestinian people, as well as the humanitarian aid Slovakia has provided. Minister J. Blanár confirmed that Slovakia will continue its support, which since the outbreak of the conflict has surpassed 670 thousand euros in the form of financial or material aid as well as through medical evacuations from the Gaza Strip. The Slovak Republic has thus far conducted eight such specialised flights and transported almost 200 civilians, including 55 seriously ill paediatric patients. A major portion of the aid to the Palestinian population also consisted of a financial contribution of 100 thousand euros to the World Food Program.
In addition, the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic also ensured the assisted arrival of nine Palestinian students from the Gaza Strip to Slovakia. They are currently preparing for their studies, primarily in medical fields, thanks to scholarships from the Slovak government. In the view of the head of Slovak diplomacy, providing scholarships is one of the ways that Slovakia is trying to help in the reconstruction of the war-torn region and contributing to building the human capacities needed for a successful and resilient society.
Minister Juraj Blanár noted that the Slovak Republic is also interested in continuing cultural exchanges with the aim of creating a solid foundation for future Slovak-Palestinian cooperation. In this regard, the head of Slovak diplomacy highlighted the activities carried out by the Ambassador of the State of Palestine to the Slovak Republic, Safa Khaldi.
Photo gallery from the visit of the Palestinian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
Press conference
Updated 25.02.2026 -
Published 17.02.2026
