On April 1, 2024, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) fired on a World Central Kitchen convoy as it was delivering food to civilians in Gaza. Drone strikes killed seven humanitarian workers, including from the United Kingdom, Australia and a dual Canada-U.S. national.
August 21, 2026 - Ottawa, Ontario - Global Affairs Canada
Joint statement from the foreign ministries of Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom:
“On April 1, 2024, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) fired on a World Central Kitchen convoy as it was delivering food to civilians in Gaza. Drone strikes killed seven humanitarian workers, including from the United Kingdom, Australia and a dual Canada-U.S. national.
“At the time, the IDF described this incident as a serious mistake and failure. In the more than two years since, we have been pressing Israel to swiftly and thoroughly consider the case and hold those responsible to account. The announcement by the IDF on August 19, 2026, that it would not pursue criminal investigations into this strike, without further explanation, is shameful. Announcing this decision on World Humanitarian Day, while the world honoured the courage and sacrifice of humanitarians, was particularly egregious. This decision is both too little and too late. The victims of this incident and their families deserve justice and accountability, and we will continue to seek answers on their behalf.
“The World Central Kitchen attack is one of countless incidents in Gaza where there has been no accountability. In Gaza, humanitarian workers continue to work tirelessly to support civilians in desperate need, risking their lives while working in the most perilous conditions. Despite the fragile ceasefire, Gaza remains the deadliest place to deliver aid, with 186 humanitarian workers killed in 2025. Israel must comply with its obligations under international humanitarian law and must do more to ensure that humanitarian staff can carry out their work safely. Lessons must be learned from this tragedy.”
