11.11.2024
Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim!
Honorable chairman!
Distinguished heads of delegations!
I would like to extend my deep gratitude to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, and His Highness the Crown Prince and Prime Minister Mohammed bin Salman Al Saud for hosting this important summit today on the most urgent and painful issue on the global political agenda - the problem of Palestine.
Regrettably, since the historic meeting in Riyadh in 2023, the scope of this unfair and violent war has further widened.
Despite the resolute efforts and urges of the international community, flagrant violation of international norms and resolutions continues to this day.
We are all dismayed by the fact that now the flames of war encompass Lebanon as well.
As my colleagues have noted in their statements, these devastating and horrific attacks, which have caused the deaths of thousands of innocent children, women and the elderly, are turning into the darkest page of the new history of humanity.
One cannot watch without broken heart how social infrastructure facilities, schools, hospitals, mosques and even entire cities are turning into ruins, leaving millions of civilians homeless and doomed to hunger and disease.
Worst of all, as we all can see, this tragedy on the international arena is being approached through double standards.
This dramatically increases the potential for spillover of the war and poses a serious threat to international security.
Dear participants of the summit!
Uzbekistan fully supports all practical initiatives aimed at addressing the Palestinian-Israeli problem through peace and diplomacy.
In this regard, we believe that today's Summit will demonstrate common political will and unity, develop effective global and regional mechanisms and specific solutions, and swiftly put them in practice.
In first place, here we are referring to the need to drastically increase the role and influence of the United Nations and the Security Council in addressing this long-standing conflict.
Immediate cessation of military action, provision of safe humanitarian corridors and, most importantly, the initiation of peace negotiations should be at constant focus of this universal international structure.
Second. On November 15, the long suffering Palestinian people will celebrate their National Day - the Declaration of State of Palestine.
I am confident that this nation with an ancient and rich history has every right to establish an independent and free state within the borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In this regard, we fully support the activities of the Global Alliance for Implementation of the Two-State Solution, organized at the initiative of Saudi Arabia.
Third. In order to prevent an unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Palestine and Lebanon, we need to expand the scope of assistance from our countries and within the framework of leading international organizations.
We support increasing the necessary assistance to the activities of UNRWA and other United Nations institutions, which have great experience.
In this regard, we express our readiness to provide free medical care to war-affected Palestinian children and women in Uzbekistan's hospitals.
We also intend to discuss the issue of extending practical assistance to the Palestinian people at the forthcoming GCC-Central Asia Summit in Samarkand next year.
Fourth. As part of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, we should attach greater attention to ensuring the sanctity and preservation of the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and other unique historical and cultural sites in Jerusalem.
Dear heads of delegations!
I hope that our extraordinary meeting today will be a big step towards addressing the Middle East problem.
I pray to Allah Almighty to bestow peace and tranquility upon the world and further strengthen the unity of our Ummah.
Thank you for your kind attention.
