This webpage uses Cookies and JavaScript in order to work properly. We strongly recommend to enable those technologies in yur browser. In case of wrongly displayed content you can request necessary information at e-mail address wwwadmin@mzv.cz
Skip to menu
Photo: © MZV ČR / MFA CZ
16.10.2025 / 13:03 | Aktualizováno: 16.10.2025 / 15:42
A further consignment of Czech humanitarian and medical assistance destined for the operation of field hospitals in the Gaza Strip arrived in Jordan today. The shipment includes medical instruments, protective equipment, bandage materials, medicines, and other supplies. The handover in Jordan was attended by the Ambassador of the Czech Republic to Jordan, Andrea Kučerová.
“Czechia is acutely aware of the critical humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and has been aiding on the ground over the long term. The materials intended for Jordan’s field hospitals are a continuation of this support. Since the beginning of the conflict, these facilities have treated more than 100,000 patients,” said Minister of Foreign Affairs Jan Lipavský about the handover.
The Ministry of Defence of the Czech Republic contributed to the delivery of the supplies to Jordan and proposed to the Government that the donation be dispatched. “The field hospitals comprise a range of standard and specialised departments, including neonatology and neurosurgery. Strengthening Jordan’s capacity to provide medical assistance thanks to the Ministry of Defence’s donation will help improve the humanitarian situation,” added Minister of Defence Jana Černochová.
Jordan is engaged in the Gaza Strip not only through the direct provision of assistance, but also by operating two field hospitals and preparing to open a third facility. Czech diplomacy remains ready— including through the Embassy in Amman— to continue helping to alleviate the crisis in the area.
galleries
Česko dodalo vybavení pro polní nemocnice v Pásmu Gazy / Czechia Delivers Equipment for Field Hospitals in the Gaza Strip
