Background:
The situation in Gaza remains volatile and unpredictable, especially in light of the regional conflict in the Middle East, which has further restricted movement in the region. Canada is deeply concerned about the scale of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and remains committed to removing barriers to entering Canada for individuals approved under the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza.
Public Policy Considerations:
The goal of this public policy is to facilitate entry into Canada for foreign nationals with approved temporary resident visas that were issued following facilitation under Part 1 and Part 2 of the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza, who were not able to travel to Canada before Part 3 of the above-noted public policy expired. This public policy positions the Government of Canada to follow through on its commitment to those directly affected by the crisis in Gaza who have been approved or will be approved for a temporary resident visa based on this facilitation, but have not yet been able to travel to Canada.
As such, I hereby establish that, pursuant to my authority under section 25.2 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (the Act), there are public policy considerations that justify the granting of an exemption from the application of any of the listed provisions of the Act to foreign nationals who meet the eligibility criteria and conditions listed below.
Eligibility Criteria and Conditions:
Based on the public policy considerations, delegated officers may grant an exemption from the provisions of the Act listed below to foreign nationals who meet the following conditions:
The foreign national
holds a temporary resident visa that was issued following facilitation under the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza; and
seeks to enter Canada as a visitor.
Provisions of the Act for which an exemption may be granted:
Paragraph 20(1)(b) – the requirement for a foreign national to establish that they will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay (obligation on entry);
Subsection 22(2) – the requirement for a foreign national to establish they will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay;
Section 39 – the requirement for a foreign national not to be inadmissible for financial reasons.
Other Admissibility and Selection Criteria:
All foreign nationals eligible under this public policy are subject to all other applicable eligibility and admissibility requirements not otherwise exempted.
Effective Date and Expiration:
This public policy comes into effect on April 24, 2026, and expires on March 31, 2028, and may be revoked at any time without prior notice.
The Hon. Lena Metlege Diab, ECNS, KC, P.C., M.P.
Minister of Citizenship and Immigration
Dated at Ottawa, this 20 day of April, 2026
