Prime Minister Hon. James Marape has reaffirmed Papua New Guinea’s steadfast support for peace in the Middle East, calling on Hamas to take immediate steps to end the ongoing conflict with Israel by laying down arms, releasing hostages, and committing to a negotiated settlement.
Prime Minister Marape described the situation as “tragic and unnecessary,” noting that innocent civilians — both Palestinian and Israeli — continue to bear the brunt of the violence.
“The trigger for this latest escalation was the 7 October 2023 massacre,” Prime Minister Marape said. “That event sparked a prolonged war that has cost countless lives. The onus is now on Hamas to come out clearly, release the hostages, say sorry for starting the conflict, and sign a peace agreement.”
The Prime Minister stressed that Papua New Guinea’s position is guided by its principles as a responsible global citizen against terrorism acts and its longstanding friendship with Israel. He said PNG would support any peace process that brings lasting security and dignity to both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
“Papua New Guinea is among the few nations that have consistently stood in support of Israel,” Prime Minister Marape said. “And our status as Isreal friendly nation would be used to progress peace all around if Hamas lays down arms. “PNG can engage with Israel to halt military actions and work towards a permanent solution but Hamas must take the first step. The responsibility for ending the current suffering in Gaza lies squarely with Hamas.
“Hamas must accept responsibility, stop fighting, release hostages, and signal a genuine commitment to peace,” the Prime Minister said. “Only then can the international community, including PNG, work effectively with Israel and the United Nations towards restoring security and rebuilding lives and find lasting solutions for Israel and Palestine.”
Prime Minister Marape concluded by urging all parties to give peace and opportunity, saying it was time for an end to the “war games” and for leaders to put the lives and futures of their people first.
