INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
APPLICATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION
AND PUNISHMENT OF THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE
IN THE GAZA STRIP
(SOUTH AFRICA V. ISRAEL)
DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION
UNDER ARTICLE 63 OF THE STATUTE
SUBMITTED BY
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MARCH 12, 2026





4
DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 63 OF THE STATUTE OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
To the Registrar, International Court of Justice, the undersigned being duly authorized by the
Government of the United States:
1. On behalf of the Government of the United States, I have the honor to submit to the Court
a Declaration of Intervention pursuant to the right to intervene set out in Article 63,
paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court, in the case concerning Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel).
2. Article 82, paragraph 5, of the Rules of Court provides that a declaration of a State’s desire
to avail itself of the right of intervention conferred upon it by Article 63 of the Statute shall
specify the case and the convention to which it relates and shall contain:
(a) particulars of the basis on which the declarant State considers
itself a party to the convention;
(b) identification of the particular provisions of the convention
the construction of which it considers to be in question;
(c) a statement of the construction of those provisions for which
it contends;
(d) a list of documents in support, which documents shall be
attached.
3. Those matters are addressed in sequence below, following some preliminary observations.

5
PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
4. On December 29, 2023—less than three months after the October 7, 2023 attack by
Hamas on the people of Israel—the Government of the Republic of South Africa instituted
proceedings against the State of Israel regarding a dispute “relating to the interpretation,
application or fulfilment” of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (“Genocide Convention” or “Convention”).1 South Africa’s Application
acknowledges “the attacks in Israel on 7 October 2023,”2 but it nevertheless contends that
Israel’s self-defense measures were inconsistent with Israel’s obligations under the
Convention.3
5. To avoid any doubt, the United States affirms, in the strongest terms possible, that the
allegations of “genocide” against Israel are false. They are also unfortunately nothing new.
The United States recalls that international fora have been misused to level false charges of
“genocide” against the State of Israel since at least May 19764 as part of a broader campaign
(including UN General Assembly resolution 3379)5 to delegitimize the State of Israel and the
Jewish people and to justify or encourage terrorism against them. Sadly, that effort remains
ongoing. Only days after Hamas launched its assault of mass rape, murder, and kidnapping on
October 7, 2023, pro-Hamas actors, including the Islamic Republic of Iran, were already falsely
charging Israel once again with “genocide.”6
6. As contemplated by Article 63, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the Court, the Registrar
by letter dated February 6, 2024, duly notified the Government of the United States as a party
1 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, Dec. 9, 1948, 78 U.N.T.S. 277
(entered into force Jan. 12, 1951) (hereinafter, “Genocide Convention”).
2 Application Instituting Proceedings (hereinafter, “Application”), ¶ 1 (referencing “the attacks in Israel on 7
October 2023” and noting that it “unequivocally condemns all violations of international law by all parties,
including the direct targeting of Israeli civilians and other nationals and hostage-taking by Hamas and other
Palestinian armed groups”).
3 Id. (“The acts in question include killing Palestinians in Gaza, causing them serious bodily and mental harm,
and inflicting on them conditions of life calculated to bring about their physical destruction. The acts are all
attributable to Israel, which has failed to prevent genocide and is committing genocide in manifest violation of
the Genocide Convention, and which has also violated and is continuing to violate its other fundamental
obligations under the Genocide Convention, including by failing to prevent or punish the direct and public
incitement to genocide by senior Israeli officials and others.”)
4 See, e.g., U.N. SCOR, 31st Year, 1919th mtg., p. 15, ¶ 110, U.N. Doc. S/PV.1918 (1976) (statement of Mr.
Malik (U.S.S.R.)).
5 The United States, represented by the Honorable Daniel Patrick Moynihan, observed with respect to General
Assembly resolution 3379: “The United States rises to declare before the General Assembly of the United
Nations and before the world that it does not acknowledge, it will not abide by, it will never acquiesce in this
infamous act. [A] great evil has been loosed upon the world. The abomination of anti-Semitism -- as this
year’s Nobel Peace Laureate Andrei Sakharov observed in Moscow just a few days ago -- the abomination of
anti-Semitism has been given the appearance of international sanction. The General Assembly today grants
symbolic amnesty -- and more -- to the murderers of the six million European Jews.” U.N. GAOR, 30th Sess.,
2400th plen. mtg., pp. 795-96, ¶ 309-312, U.N. Doc. A/PV.2400 (1975) (statement of Mr. Moynihan (U.S.)).
6 See. e.g., “Iran Accuses Israel of Seeking ‘Genocide’ by Besieging Gaza,” Reuters, Oct. 12, 2023, available at
https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-accuses-israel-seeking-genocide-by-besieging-gaza-state-tv-
2023-10-12/.

6
to the Convention that in the case concerning Application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel):
[T]he [Convention] is invoked both as a basis of the Court’s
jurisdiction and as a substantive basis of the Applicant’s claims
on the merits. In particular, the Applicant seeks to found the
Court’s jurisdiction on the compromissory clause contained in
Article IX of the Genocide Convention and alleges violations of
Articles I, III, IV, V, and VI of the Convention. It therefore
appears that the construction of this instrument will be in
question in the case.7
7. The United States, as a non-party to this case, intends to present its views to the Court
on the issues of construction of the Convention relevant to the determination of the case in
accordance with Article 63 of the Statute. By this Declaration, the United States avails itself
of the right to intervene under Article 63, paragraph 2.8
8. The proper construction of the Genocide Convention is of paramount concern to all
States Parties. The United States’ views on the questions at issue in this case are further
informed by the United States’ particular role in the negotiations and shaping of the final text
of the Genocide Convention.9 The United States accordingly deems it necessary to intervene
in this case in order to place its views on the construction of the relevant provisions of the
Convention before the Court.
9. Article 82, paragraph 1, of the Rules of Court adds that a declaration of a State desiring
to avail itself of the right of intervention conferred upon it by Article 63 of the Statute shall be
filed “as soon as possible, and no later than the date fixed for the filing of the Counter
Memorial.” In accordance with that requirement, this Declaration has been filed at the earliest
opportunity reasonably open to the United States.
Case and Convention to Which This Declaration Relates
10. This Declaration relates to the case concerning Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel)
7 Letter from the Registrar to States Parties to the Genocide Convention (Feb. 6, 2024) (Annex A).
8 The Court has recognized that an intervention based on Article 63 of the Statute constitutes the exercise of a
right. Whaling in the Antarctic (Australia v. Japan), Declaration of Intervention of New Zealand, Order of 6
February 2013, I.C.J. Reports 2013, p. 5, ¶ 7; Territorial and Maritime Dispute (Nicaragua v. Colombia),
Application by Honduras for Permission to Intervene, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2011 (II), p. 434, ¶ 36;
Continental Shelf (Tunisia/Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Application for Permission to Intervene, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports 1981, p. 15, ¶ 26; Haya de la Torre (Colombia v. Peru), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1951, p. 76; S.S.
“Wimbledon,” Judgments, 1923, P.C.I.J., Series A, No. 1, p. 12.
9 The United States, among other things, served as chair of the Ad Hoc Committee created by the UN Economic
and Social Council in early 1948 to prepare a draft convention on the crime of genocide and, after that draft was
debated by the Sixth Committee of the UN General Assembly in the fall of 1948, served on the Sixth
Committee’s drafting committee.

7
instituted on December 29, 2023 by South Africa against Israel. That case concerns the
construction of the Genocide Convention.
Particulars of the Basis on Which the United States Considers Itself a Party to the
Genocide Convention
11. The United States deposited its instrument of ratification to the Convention in
accordance with Article XI of the Convention on November 25, 1988.10 The United States
remains a party to the Convention.
Provisions of the Genocide Convention the Construction of Which the United States
Considers to Be in Question
12. The Court is called on to address legal issues relating to the construction of the
Genocide Convention in the case South Africa filed against Israel. In its Application, South
Africa claims that the acts and omissions by the State of Israel are genocidal in character
because they are intended to bring about the destruction of a substantial part of the Palestinian
national, racial, and ethnical group. South Africa claims that Israel has failed to prevent
genocide and is committing genocide in violation of the Genocide Convention.11
13. Israel counters that the case:
is wholly unfounded in fact and law, morally repugnant, and
represents an abuse both of the Genocide Convention and of the
Court itself. Israel moreover wishes to reiterate that its
commitment to the observance of international law, including
the Genocide Convention and international humanitarian law, is
unwavering and applies—as Israel has demonstrated in word and
deed—in relation to the conduct of the present hostilities in Gaza
and independently of any proceeding before the Court.12
14. The United States’ intervention is accordingly directed to the questions of construction
of Articles I, II, and III of the Convention, which are in question in the case, and directly
relevant to the resolution of the dispute placed before the Court by South Africa’s Application.
10 Instrument of Ratification of the Genocide Convention by the Government of the United States of America
(November 25, 1988) (Annex B). The United States ratified the Genocide Convention with, inter alia, the
reservation that, with reference to Article IX of the Convention, before any dispute to which the United States is
a party may be submitted to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice under this article, the specific
consent of the United States is required in each case.
11 Application, ¶ 1.
12 Observations of the State of Israel on the Request for Additional Measures under Article 75(1) of the Rules of
Court, ¶¶ 2-3.

8
Construction of Those Provisions for Which the United States Contends
15. The United States’ interpretation of the Genocide Convention is based on the customary
international law of treaty interpretation, as reflected in provisions of the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, including Articles 31 and 32.13
16. Article II of the Genocide Convention defines the crime of genocide as any of five acts
“committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group, as such.”14 The United States ratified the Convention with, inter alia, the understanding
that the term “intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious
group as such” means “the specific intent to destroy, in whole or in substantial part, a national,
ethnical, racial or religious group as such by the acts specified in article II” and the
understanding that “acts in the course of armed conflicts committed without the specific intent
required by article II are not sufficient to constitute genocide as defined by” the Convention.15
17. The United States’ understandings are consistent with the Court’s interpretation of
“intent to destroy” to mean “a dolus specialis that . . . must be present in addition to the intent
required for each of the individual acts involved.”16
18. As the Court has held previously, “claims against a State involving charges of
exceptional gravity must be proved by evidence that is fully conclusive,” and the Court must
be “fully convinced” that allegations of the crime of genocide have been committed.17 When
dolus specialis must be inferred from perpetrators’ conduct the Court requires that:
The dolus specialis, the specific intent to destroy the group in
whole or in part, has to be convincingly shown by reference to
particular circumstances, unless a general plan to that end can be
convincingly demonstrated to exist; and for a pattern of conduct
to be accepted as evidence of its existence, it would have to be
such it could only point to the existence of such intent.18
13 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, May 23, 1969, arts. 31-32, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, 340 (entered into
force Jan. 27, 1980). While the United States is not a party to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, it
recognizes that a number of its provisions, including those in Articles 31 and 32, reflect customary international
law.
14 Genocide Convention, art. 2.
15 Instrument of Ratification of the Genocide Convention by the Government of the United States of America
(November 25, 1988), p. 2 (Annex B).
16 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, 2015 I.C.J. Reports 3, p. 62, ¶ 132.
17 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, 2007 I.C.J. Reports 43, p. 129, ¶ 209.
18 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, 2007 I.C.J. Reports 43, pp. 196-97, ¶ 373 (emphasis added).
In Croatia v. Serbia, the Court noted this finding “now must be regarded as solidly rooted in its jurisprudence.”
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, 2015 I.C.J. Reports 3, p. 150, ¶ 510.

9
19. The Court later clarified this standard, stating it “amounts to saying that, in order to
infer the existence of dolus specialis from a pattern of conduct, it is necessary and sufficient
that this is the only inference that could reasonably be drawn from the acts in question.”19
20. The United States submits that the Court should maintain its standard for inferring
intent. Lowering the standard risks broadening the application of the term “genocide” such
that it no longer carries its original weight and meaning, and invites attempts to misuse the
Genocide Convention as a gateway for bringing extraneous disputes before the Court. The
United States recognizes that the Convention specifically contemplates genocide occurring in
times of war, which suggests that a perpetrator may pursue a military objective while also
having the intent to destroy the group, in whole or in part. As the Court has held repeatedly,
however, the applicable standard demands that the only reasonable inference from such
conduct be that the perpetrator(s) acted with genocidal intent.20 If it might reasonably be
inferred from a pattern of conduct that the perpetrator acted without such intent, the standard
has not been met.
21. In assessing whether a perpetrator has genocidal intent, it is essential to take into
account the context of the situation. As the Court has stated, it “examine[s] the context in
which the acts constituting the actus reus of genocide . . . were committed, in order to determine
the aim pursued by the authors of those acts.”21 This is paramount when the situation involves
an armed conflict, where certain acts that might otherwise qualify as actus rei of genocide may
occur without the requisite genocidal intent. Civilian casualties, even widespread civilian
casualties, are not necessarily probative of genocidal intent, particularly when they occur in the
context of an armed conflict involving urban combat. The law of armed conflict not only
recognizes the possibility of civilian harm but permits it so long as the relevant principles of
discrimination and proportionality are met. In drawing inferences during an armed conflict,
evidence of efforts to comply with the law of armed conflict with respect to the protection of
civilians, as well as other efforts to avoid or mitigate civilian harm, should be taken into account
as evidence that genocide is not a reasonable inference from the conduct in question—and is
certainly not the only reasonable inference that may be drawn from that conduct. For example,
taking prisoners of war who are members of the protected group, as well as allowing the release
or exchange of such prisoners, may rebut genocidal intent.22 The conduct of the targeted
19 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, 2015 I.C.J. Reports 3, p. 67, ¶ 148 (emphasis added).
20 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, 2007 I.C.J. Reports 43, pp. 196-97, ¶ 373; Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), Judgment,
2015 I.C.J. Reports 3, p. 67, ¶ 148.
21 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, 2015 I.C.J. Reports 3, p. 122, ¶ 419.
22 The Court previously took into account the number of civilians evacuated and the fact that many prisoners of
war had not been executed as evidence that “the existence of intent to physically destroy the Croatian population
is not the only reasonable conclusion that can be drawn from the illegal attack.” Application of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), Judgment, 2015 I.C.J. Reports
3, pp. 124-27, ¶¶ 430-36.

10
combatants may also matter: for instance, combatants’ use of civilians as human shields (a war
crime) may thwart even the most rigorous efforts to minimize civilian harm.
22. In addition, it is well established that “intent” requires more than mere knowledge. Not
only does the ordinary meaning of “intent” support such a conclusion, but the preparatory work
of the Genocide Convention confirms it as well. In the course of drafting the Convention,
States proposed language such as, “with the purpose of”; “aimed at”; and, finally, “with intent
to” to ensure only perpetrators with a certain mens rea were found to have committed
genocide.23 These proposals evince a shared understanding—from its inception—that
genocide requires a mens rea beyond “knew or should have known.”
Documents in Support of the Declaration
23. The following documents are in support of this Declaration and attached hereto:
(a) Letter from the Registrar to States Parties to the Genocide Convention, dated
February 6, 2024 (Annex A); and
(b) Instrument of Ratification of the Genocide Convention by the Government of the
United States of America, dated November 25, 1988 (Annex B).
23 See generally Draft Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Genocide (prepared by the Secretariat),
U.N. Doc. A/AC.10/42/Rev.1 (June 12, 1947); U.N. Econ. & Soc. Council, Draft Convention on the Crime of
Genocide, U.N. Doc. E/447 (June 26, 1947).

















