Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9534
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9534th meeting
Tuesday, 23 January 2024, 2 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Séjourné/Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Broadhurst Estival/
Mr. Olmedo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(France)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Attaf
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Gasca
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Uemura
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sengeh
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Fajon
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cassis
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Lord Ahmad
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Zeya
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-01767 (E)
*2401767*

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
2/59 24-01767
The meeting was called to order at 2.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other high-level representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
Before each member is a list of speakers who have
requested to participate in accordance with rules 37
and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
as well as the previous practice of the Council in this
regard. We propose that they be invited to participate
in this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Observer State
of Palestine to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Riad Al-Malki.
I also propose that the Council invite the observer
of the Holy See to the United Nations to participate in
the meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Over 100 days have passed
since more than 1,200 Israelis and others were killed in
the horrific terror attacks launched by Hamas against
Israel, with over 250 people being taken hostage. For all
those affected, these have been 100 days of heartache
and anguish. Nothing can justify the deliberate killing,
injuring or kidnapping of civilians, the use of sexual
violence against them or the indiscriminate launching
of rockets towards civilian targets. I once again
demand the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages. In the interim, they must be treated humanely
and allowed to receive visits and assistance from the
Red Cross.
Last week in Davos, I had another moving meeting
with families of hostages, and in this case even some
former hostages themselves. Since the beginning,
I have maintained close contact with Qatari and
Egyptian authorities on the efforts for their release.
And yesterday, I received from the Israeli Mission
a list of many of the remaining hostages. It was also
reported yesterday that Israel is proposing a two-month
pause in hostilities in exchange for a phased release
of all the remaining hostages. I will continue, in my
limited capacity, to pursue all efforts to contribute to
their release.
The past 100 days have been heartbreaking and
catastrophic for Palestinian civilians in Gaza. More
than 25,000 people, mainly women and children, have
reportedly been killed in operations launched by Israeli
forces. More than 60,000 others have been reportedly
injured. In recent days, the military offensive has
intensified in Khan Yunis, with many additional
causalities. The entire population of Gaza is enduring
destruction at a scale and speed without parallel in
recent history. Nothing can justify the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is appalling.
With winter bearing down, 2.2 million Palestinians in
Gaza face inhumane, squalid conditions, struggling to
simply make it through another day — without proper
shelter, heating, sanitary facilities, food or drinkable
water. Everyone in Gaza is hungry, with a quarter
of Gaza’s population — more than half a million
people — grappling with catastrophic levels of food
insecurity. Meanwhile, nearly 1.5 million people are
now crammed inside Rafah governorate. Disease is
spreading as the health system collapses. Only 16 of
Gaza’s 36 hospitals are even partly functional. That
means that the people of Gaza not only risk being killed
or injured by relentless bombardments; they also run
a growing chance of contracting infectious diseases
such as hepatitis-A, dysentery and cholera. Without
functioning hospitals, and with minimal opportunities
for patients to exit Gaza, thousands suffering from
chronic diseases such as cancer and kidney failure
are at risk of dying. A functioning medical evacuation
system is urgently needed.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 3/59
In the face of colossal human suffering and
enormous obstacles, our United Nations humanitarian
operations are striving to deliver. Tragically, 153 of our
colleagues have been killed — a source of bottomless
grief for us all. At the same time, the women and men of
the United Nations, alongside our partners in Gaza, are
working heroically every day to reach people in need.
Many have lost loved ones and left behind shattered
homes. They have been distributing ready-to-eat meals
and other food items to shelters. They are supporting
the very few bakeries that are still functioning. They are
delivering medicines, medical supplies, bottled water
and trucked water, hygiene kits and cleaning kits, tents,
tarpaulin sheets and blankets, but in quantities that are
far from enough. In the south, food distributions are
helping to bring down prices, and 250,000 Palestinians
in Gaza were able to buy bread at a subsidized price.
I welcome the agreement facilitated by Qatar and
France of an operation to deliver additional medicines
and health-care supplies to civilians in Gaza and to
hostages held in Gaza.
I also welcome Israel’s announcement that it will
allow a United Nations assessment mission to the
north. However, that mission is on hold because of
renewed fighting.
Under-Secretary-General Sigrid Kaag started
her work as Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction
Coordinator for Gaza on 8 January, in line with Security
Council resolution 2720 (2023). She visited Gaza today
and will update the Council next week on her overall
efforts. I ask all parties to the conflict to cooperate with
her, as demanded by the Security Council.
Let us face it: despite all the efforts I described, no
effective humanitarian aid operation can function under
the conditions that have been forced on Palestinians in
Gaza and those doing everything possible to help them.
The quantity of aid is highly insufficient in the light of
the needs. It is a fantasy to think that 2.2 million people
can survive on aid alone. Basic commodities from the
private sector must enter in meaningful quantities, as
they did for many years before the current fighting.
That is essential to address rising needs and avert both
a complete breakdown and an ever-mounting death toll.
For our part, we are determined to do much more to
scale up the distribution of food items, tents and shelter
materials, medicines, clean water and spare parts to
repair critical sanitation infrastructure.
Humanitarian delivery is not an exercise of counting
trucks. It is about ensuring that the right volume and
quality of assistance reaches people in need, in line
with Security Council resolution 2720 (2023). But to be
able to do our work, a set of operational requirements
must be met.
We need safety. We are operating in a war zone.
The current humanitarian notification mechanisms
do not offer any real confidence for operations and
planning humanitarian responses. A number of serious
incidents have shown how those essential mechanisms
need to be substantially improved. Safety also entails
reliable and cleared roads inside Gaza and unimpeded
crossings at checkpoints.
We need to be equipped to do our job. That includes
telecommunications equipment, so that convoys can
communicate with each other; armoured vehicles
and protective gear, given the ongoing hostilities and
widespread contamination of explosive remnants of
war; far greater logistical capacity; spare parts for
infrastructure, such as desalination plants; and other
critical humanitarian items.
We are grateful to Member States for their funding
support. We are finally seeing a few signs of progress in
the authorization of entry permits for certain goods and
some measures to reduce screening and crossing times.
But we still face a cumbersome process of verifications
and multiple unjustified rejections of desperately
needed items. We need more crossing points into Gaza
to reduce congestion and avoid choke-points.
The provision of aid to Gaza via the Ashdod port
in Israel must also resume. A first shipment of flour
reached Gaza from Ashdod, but much more is required.
We need access to the north. In the first two weeks
of January, out of 29 planned humanitarian missions to
deliver lifesaving supplies north of Wadi Gaza, only 7
were fully or partially accomplished. The majority of
missions were denied access by Israel. After over 100
days of operations in the north, insecurity and fighting
has continued.
We also need visas. Dozens of humanitarians
have been waiting for months to receive their visas
from the Government of Israel. I call for rapid, safe,
unhindered, expanded and sustained humanitarian
access throughout Gaza.
I repeat my call for an end to all violations of
international humanitarian law. The use of human

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
4/59 24-01767
shields is unacceptable, as are the unprecedented levels
of devastation and civilian killings. I am also deeply
troubled by reports of Israel’s inhumane treatment of
Palestinians detained during military operations.
I renew my appeal for an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire. This will ensure sufficient aid gets to where
it is needed, facilitate the release of hostages and
help to lower tensions around the Middle East. War
and misery in Gaza are fuelling turmoil far beyond.
We are seeing dangerous developments across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, where
tensions are off the charts, with a dramatic increase in
casualties. Dozens of Palestinians are being arrested
daily. Over 6,000 Palestinians have been detained since
7 October, with many subsequently released. Settler
violence is also another major concern. The demolition
and seizure of Palestinian-owned houses and other
structures continues. The Palestinian economy is in
crisis. Israel’s withholding of a significant portion of
Palestinian tax revenues, the continued prohibition
of nearly all Palestinian workers entering Israel
since 7 October and severe movement and access
restrictions across the West Bank are all contributing
to soaring unemployment and poverty. I hope that
ongoing negotiations will allow for the full payment of
employees of the Palestinian Authority.
The risks of broader regional escalation are
now becoming a reality. Turning to the north, daily
exchanges of fire across the Blue Line, including
strikes on civilian areas, have killed six Israelis and
25 Lebanese civilians and driven tens of thousands
of people from their homes on both sides. The risk of
miscalculation is dangerously high. I urge all parties
to refrain from aggressive rhetoric and to immediately
end activities that could further inflame tensions. My
Special Coordinators and I continue our extensive
outreach to all key stakeholders to reduce regional
tensions, and I welcome the efforts of the United States
and several European and Arab Governments for a
negotiated de-escalation.
The situation in the Red Sea is also deeply
worrisome. Houthi attacks are disrupting global trade.
Those have been followed by air strikes by the United
States and the United Kingdom on Houthi positions in
Yemen. De-escalation is essential, and all attacks on
merchant and commercial vessels in the Red Sea must
cease immediately.
Meanwhile, there are almost daily attacks on
facilities hosting United States and international
coalition forces in Iraq and Syria. In response, the
United States has launched air strikes targeting
individuals and groups suspected of those actions. In
Syria, air strikes that Iran and Syria have attributed to
Israel have targeted officials of Hamas and the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps of Iran. I urge all parties to
step back from the brink and to consider the horrendous
human cost of a regional conflict.
Beyond the need for immediate de-escalation,
each situation demands the implementation of a clear
political road map that would contribute to long-term
regional stability. In Syria, that is a United Nations-
facilitated political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015) that meets the needs of all Syrians. Along the
Blue Line, we need the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). In Yemen, we need the establishment of a
United Nations road map to implement the commitments
made by the parties and prepare for a Yemeni-owned,
inclusive political process under the auspices of the
United Nations.
A lasting end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can
come only through a two-State solution. Israelis must
see their legitimate needs for security materialized, and
Palestinians must see their legitimate aspirations for a
fully independent, viable and sovereign State realized,
in line with United Nations resolutions, international
law and previous agreements. Israel’s occupation
must end.
Last week’s clear and repeated rejection of the
two-State solution at the highest level of the Israeli
Government is unacceptable. That was despite the
strongest appeals from even the friends of Israel,
including those sitting around this table. That refusal
and the denial of the right to statehood to the Palestinian
people would indefinitely prolong a conflict that has
become a major threat to global peace and security. It
would exacerbate polarization and embolden extremists
everywhere. The right of the Palestinian people to build
their own fully independent State must be recognized
by all. And any refusal to accept the two-State solution
by any party must be firmly rejected.
What is the alternative? How would a one-State
solution look with such a large number of Palestinians
inside without any real sense of freedom, rights or
dignity? That would be inconceivable. The two-State
solution is the only way to address the legitimate
aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 5/59
(spoke in French)
The role of the international community is clear.
We must unite to support the Israelis and Palestinians
in taking strong steps towards a genuine peace process.
Over the past two decades, the two-State solution
has been criticized, denigrated and left for dead time
and again. However, it remains the only way to achieve
a lasting and equitable peace — in Israel, in Palestine
and in the region as a whole.
As we have tragically seen over the past three
months, it is also the only way out of the endless cycles
of fear, hatred and violence. This terrible time for
Israelis and Palestinians must spur the parties to the
conflict, as well as the international community, to act
with courage and determination to achieve a just and
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine): Allow me at the
outset to thank France and you, Mr. President, for
convening the Security Council at the ministerial
level, as we meet once again in the shadows of the
deadly Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people, which continues unabated, taking thousands
of innocent civilian lives, destroying everything in its
path and threatening regional and international peace
and security.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, but more importantly, for his relentless
efforts in pursuit of an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire, the protection of civilians and the provision of
desperately needed humanitarian assistance. Under his
leadership, the United Nations agencies on the ground
have persisted in their valiant efforts to perform their
sacred mission in the most impossible of circumstances.
Those circumstances are impossible by design. They
are not the result of a natural disaster or a regrettable
consequence of the war, but rather a premeditated effort
to inflict maximum pain on the Palestinian population
by combining three factors: one, the most savage and
indiscriminate bombing campaign in the post-Second
World War era; two, massive destruction and cruel
siege, depriving the population of the essentials for its
survival, leading to the spread of famine, dehydration,
disease, destitution and despair; and three, forcible
displacement at a scale and speed not witnessed in
modern history, with virtually the entire Palestinian
population in the Gaza Strip, 70 per cent of whom are
refugees from the 1948 Nakba, displaced, often multiple
times, in desperate search of safety anywhere, yet faced
with death and devastation everywhere.
No home hospital, school, mosque, church or shelter
belonging to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is safe
from Israel’s bombardment, with 2,000-ton bombs
dropped with no care whatsoever for civilian lives.
More than 25,000 civilians have been killed, including
more than 11,000 children. More than 63,000 civilians
have been injured, with thousands permanently maimed
and disabled, and more than 7,000 are buried under the
rubble. Dozens more will be killed in the hours that the
Council meets, and thousands more will be killed as the
Council continues to be prevented from calling for an
immediate ceasefire.
This is an assault of atrocities that shock and shame
the human conscience. In making that determination,
the faith of the perpetrators is irrelevant. The faith of
the victims is irrelevant. The only thing that matters is
the countless innocent lives destroyed and the violent
shattering of the laws enacted after the Second World
War in order to preserve humankind.
From Kampala, where the global South was
gathered, to Brussels, where Arab ministers met their
European counterparts, to the United Nations, in New
York, the world is calling for an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire. A ceasefire is indispensable to achieve what
the Security Council has called for — the protection
of civilians, safe and unhindered humanitarian access,
humanitarian assistance at scale throughout the Gaza
Strip, the release of those held captive, the rejection of
forced displacement and the achievement of a peace
consistent with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
On one side there is the will of the international
community and, on the other, the whims of an Israeli
Prime Minister driven by a single goal — his own
political survival, at the expense of the survival
of millions of Palestinians under Israel’s illegal
occupation and peace and security for all. There is a
dividing line between those who want peace and those
who are determined to prevent it. The latter believe
that there is a people too many in our region, while the
former believe that there is an independent State, too-
long denied its rightful place among the community of

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
6/59 24-01767
nations and its people denied their inalienable right to
self-determination. For the leaders at the helm in Israel,
the Palestinian people are a people too many. The
leaders deny the existence, rights and humanity of the
Palestinian people — whether in Gaza, the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, be they Palestinian refugees
or Palestinian prisoners. They do not see our people as
an empirical and political reality to coexist with, but
as a demographic threat to get rid of through death,
displacement or subjugation. Those are the choices
they offer us: genocide, ethnic cleansing or apartheid.
I know that some here are uncomfortable with those
words, but they are the reality that we live under. And
trust me, those people should be much more concerned
with the existence of that reality than the words used to
describe it.
There are only two paths ahead. One starts with
Palestinian freedom and leads to shared peace and
security in our region. The other continues denying that
freedom and dooms our region to further bloodshed and
endless conflict. The Arab world has been unequivocal
in choosing the first path, the one that enjoys support
by the international community, as a whole. Meanwhile,
Netanyahu boasts publicly and repeatedly that he
played a key role in preventing the independence of the
Palestinian State and peace in our region and pledges to
continue. Israel should no longer entertain the illusion
that there is somehow a third path whereby it can choose
continued occupation, colonialism and apartheid and,
somehow, still achieve regional peace and security.
That is not a viable or legitimate path. Our people are
not less deserving of freedom, security or peace. Our
children’s lives are not less sacred. Our cause is just, and
the resilience and steadfastness of our people — their
sumud — is epic and worthy of the international solidarity
they have received from across the globe.
But as the poet Mahmoud Darwish once said, their
hope is for a normal life in which they are neither heroes
nor victims, a life where they are able to live, thrive, see
their children grow and become whatever they wish to
be. They should not have to fight every day for their
survival, their most basic and fundamental rights or
their simple dream of living in freedom and dignity on
their ancestral land. The Nakba should not be prolonged
any further, nor should it be repeated time and time
again. It must come to an immediate end. It is time for
international law and United Nations resolutions to be
fully respected and for non-compliance to be penalized.
It is time for accountability. Justice is paramount. It is
the foundation of any sustainable peace. Attempts to
frame the pursuit of justice as somehow opposed to
peace must cease. It is time to convene an international
peace conference with a clear objective — upholding
international law and implementing United Nations
resolutions through resolute action by all States,
organizations and the United Nations. It is time to
recognize the admission of the State of Palestine to the
United Nations. We were not granted the right to veto
Israel’s admission to the United Nations 75 years ago.
Israel does not have a right to veto the admission of the
State of Palestine 75 years later.
The international consensus on two States on this
land must be upheld in word and deed. There can be
no more pretexts for endless delays and obstruction.
The disregard for Palestinian life, for international
law and for the regional and international desire to
bring about just and lasting peace should no longer be
tolerated. We are running out of time. There are two
choices — spreading fire or a ceasefire. The alternative
to freedom, justice and peace is what is happening now.
We must make sure that it stops now, and we must make
sure that it never happens again — never again.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
thank France and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your recent appointment. I wish you the best in your
crucial position.
Today the Council has a historic opportunity to
shift its focus to the real and grave security threat. The
Middle East is suffering from a cancer, and until today
the Security Council has only ever discussed providing
aspirin. Cancer is not treated with aspirin. The time has
come for the Council to address and eliminate the root
of that cancer, not just its side effects.
We live in a backwards world. Eighteen years ago,
Israel fully withdrew from Gaza in hopes of building
trust with the Palestinians and charting a path towards
a joint future. Instead, the Palestinians voted in the
Hamas terror organization, and since then, under the
nose of the United Nations and its agencies, Hamas has
exploited international aid and turned Gaza into the
war machine that it is today. Hamas has dug hundreds
of miles of terror tunnels and manufactured tens of
thousands of rockets. It has not hidden its genocidal
goals of annihilating Israel. The world knew that. The
United Nations knew that.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 7/59
On 7 October, Hamas’s agenda of Jewish genocide
became a reality. My people were deliberately
butchered, with 1,200 murdered in a single day and 240
children, men, women and elderly people taken hostage.
That act of sheer evil was proportionally 20 times
bigger than 9/11, and Hamas’s leadership has publicly
sworn to commit such massacres again and again until
Israel is destroyed. Shockingly, however, many here on
the Security Council are advocating for a permanent
ceasefire while giving no thought to the implications.
What does the Council think will happen if there is a
ceasefire? This is what will happen. Hamas will remain
in power. It will regroup and rearm and soon Israelis
will face another attempted Holocaust. Is that the
outcome that the Council seeks for all of us? That Israel
will once again be forced to carry out another defensive
operation in Gaza? Does the Council truly expect us to
leave our hostages in Hamas’s terror tunnels?
As long as Hamas remains in power, a very dark
future is inevitable for all of us. How can Council
members call for a ceasefire and suggest a solution to the
conflict at the same time? That is a complete oxymoron.
We cannot have both — it is impossible. Hamas seeks to
annihilate Israel, and if the Council supports a position
that will leave Hamas in power, it cannot pretend to
wish for a solution to the conflict. The past 18 years
have proved that. But there is a formula that can end the
bloodshed, and if the Council stands united behind it, it
will materialize. Should Hamas turn in those responsible
for 7 October and release all the hostages, this war would
be over immediately. It is not a war that Israel chose, but
we will defend our future just as all members here would
defend their countries’ future.
Today’s meeting is a demonstration of the pinnacle
of the absurdity of the United Nations. Hamas and the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad are vile terrorists. But those
forces of terror are a mere symptom of the true security
threat in the region and beyond. There is a regime
responsible for sponsoring 90 per cent of Hamas’s terror
budget, as well as for arming and training those who
carry it out. It is the same regime that supplies Hizbullah
with precision missiles and provides the Houthis with
ballistic missiles. All of that is being done in order to
wreak havoc and instability in the Middle East, and
soon those acts of terror will be carried out under a
nuclear umbrella. Yet the Council basically ignores that
enormous threat — the threat that is the ayatollah regime
of Iran. How absurd is it that the Foreign Minister of
the number-one State sponsor of terrorism aspiring to
destabilize the Middle East is here today to address the
Council? Can anyone imagine Hitler’s Foreign Minister
participating in a serious discussion on how to defend
the Jews during the Holocaust? This is an upside-down
world. The representative of a regime that publicly calls
for the annihilation of the State of Israel is advising on
how to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This is a
truly upside-down world.
We hear calls for avoiding a spillover of the conflict.
I want to clarify that this spillover is not happening
magically. It was planned and instructed. The person
directly responsible for the terror attacks throughout
the region and for this spillover since 7 October will
be sitting here soon. Mr. Amir-Abdollahian represents
the regime that arms and instructs Hizbullah to target
our civilians. He represents the regime that transfers
weapons and intelligence to the Houthis. Without Iran,
the Houthis would not possess advanced cruise missiles
or unmanned aerial vehicles for targeting merchant
vessels in the Red Sea. If we look at this picture, what
we see are Iranian weapons that were seized by the
United States Navy on their way to the Houthis. This
is clear proof of who is masterminding this so-called
spillover. Has Iran’s Foreign Minister come here to be
held accountable? We all know the answer to that. Iran
always stands in the shadows and pulls the strings. It
always claims deniability, but the evidence is right here,
just as in many other cases. Will the Council finally
address the real threat to regional security?
Every country in the region has been affected by
Iran’s tentacles of terror. Saudi Arabia has been attacked
with Iranian-supplied UAVs and ballistic missiles.
The United Arab Emirates suffered several drone and
missile attacks on its soil, including a strike on the Abu
Dhabi International Airport. And recent Iranian strikes
in Iraq, Syria and Pakistan are further proof that Iran
will stop at nothing to expand its Shiite hegemony.
In Lebanon, just as in Yemen, Iraq and Syria, Iran
is the architect of instability. Even the people of Iran
themselves suffer daily, and Council members know
it. The Iranian regime murders women and innocent
protesters. And, just yesterday, another innocent Iranian,
Muhammad Ghobadlou, was executed. And while
innocent Iranians swing from the gallows, Minister Amir-
Abdollahian will sit here and lecture us on the sanctity
of human life. Iran is even responsible for arming and
training the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía
el-Hamra y de Río de Oro to carry out terror attacks in
Morocco, and its hegemonic ambitions can be felt in the
Sudan, Mali and the Niger as well.

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
8/59 24-01767
But Iran’s terror does not affect only the Middle
East and Africa. Albania was hit with an Iranian
cyberattack. And as we all know, Iranian drones are
being used by Russia to kill civilians in Ukraine. Iran’s
terror will reach all Council members. We all know that.
It will even reach Russia, which collaborates with Iran.
If the Council continues to focus only on providing
aid to Gaza, which is truly important, but ignores
the root of the dire threat to the Middle East and the
world — the Iranian threat — then our collective future
will be a very dark, radical Shiite future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of France.
I took the initiative of holding this Security Council
debate at the ministerial level under our presidency.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
powerful statement, and in my national capacity, I
would also like to refer to the tragic situation in Gaza
and the risk of conflagration in the region. That risk
is real.
In the light of what is at stake between Israelis
and Palestinians, there are two possible paths for the
Council. On the one hand, there is the choice being
made by some — the choice of division, polemics
and one-upmanship; the choice of fanning the flames;
and the choice of those who invade their neighbour
and trample on their sovereignty, in Ukraine as in the
Middle East, and seek division rather than unity here.
For my part, I will make another choice and say
two things. We can, we must, show solidarity with both
Israelis and Palestinians. We can, we must, say difficult
things to both.
France is acting for the good of both peoples in the
name of peace. It is a friend of Israel, just as it is the
friend of the Palestinian people. Therefore, I have to
say to Israel, which enjoys the friendship of the French
people, that there must be a Palestinian State; that
violence against the Palestinian people, in particular
that committed by extremist settlers, must end; and
that international law applies to everyone. And I must
say to the Palestinian representatives, who are aware
of France’s historic commitment to a Palestinian State,
that France will continue to fight against terrorism
vigorously and with determination. There can be no
ambiguity about Israel’s right to live in peace and
security and to exercise its right to self-defence in the
face of terrorism. As a friend, France says to both sides
that the path ahead will be difficult for all.
Three principles will guide France’s action within
the Security Council in the days and weeks ahead. I
would like to spell them out here.
The first is the principle of humanity. All hostages
must be released immediately and unconditionally.
That is an absolute necessity. We have called for that
repeatedly. The Council, too, has clearly called for it. On
behalf of the principle of humanity, we must condemn
unequivocally and without further delay the terrorist
attacks of 7 October, which were massive, barbaric and
heinous attacks committed by terrorists. Our Council
must also open its eyes to the sexual violence used by
those terrorists as a weapon of war.
Also, in the name of the principle of humanity,
we must act in favour of the civilian population of
Gaza and work for a ceasefire. The suffering they are
experiencing is appalling. France is among those in
the Council who are taking action. The President of
the Republic, Emmanuel Macron, took the initiative to
convene an international humanitarian conference. One
billion euros in humanitarian aid for Gaza’s civilians
was announced there. Today I am once again calling on
all our international partners to stay mobilized.
France is now one of the main supporters of Gaza’s
civilians, in particular because we have massively
increased France’s contribution to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). More than half of the €100 million
in humanitarian assistance that France announced for
Gaza in November will be channelled through UNRWA.
In 2024, we will be supporting the Palestinians even
more by providing an additional €100 million. We are
also taking tangible steps in the region: 1,000 tons
of cargo are transiting through Egypt; 1,000 medical
interventions have been carried out, in full cooperation
with Egypt, on board the Dixmude; and humanitarian
cargo was parachuted into Gaza with the help of Jordan.
The Council, in its two humanitarian resolutions
(resolution 2712 (2023) and resolution 2720 (2023))
established requirements. They must be respected. Let
us listen to the suffering of the women and men and
children of Gaza. Let us listen to the helplessness of
humanitarian actors. Civilians, civilian infrastructure,
hospitals and schools must be protected. Humanitarian
workers from the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other organizations

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 9/59
on the ground must also be protected. I pay tribute to
their courage, commitment and dedication. I want to
say to them that France will continue to support them
relentlessly and will not give up. I also want to say
that they must be able to use all the necessary crossing
points and deliver their vital cargo to the north of the
Strip, beyond Wadi Gaza. We must immediately work
for a lasting ceasefire, which alone will bring an end to
their suffering.
The second principle guiding France’s action is that
of justice. The war and the atrocious suffering oblige
us and the Council to take action. We have a duty to
make every effort to find a political solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. To achieve that, we must
relaunch the peace process and do so in a decisive and
credible manner.
We know the parameters of the solution: two States
living side by side in peace and security, within safe
and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines and
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. That is
the framework set out in international law. It is also
France’s constant position. And that is why it is not up
to Israel or anyone else to decide for the Palestinians
how they will be governed tomorrow or the extent of
their sovereignty.
Within the context of the two-State solution, we
must also think, starting now, about the future of Gaza.
It is not up to Israel to decide the fate of the Palestinian
population in Gaza. Gaza is Palestinian land, and it is
up to the Palestinian Authority, which we support, to
exercise its full authority for that to become a reality.
The United Nations has and will have an important
role to play. In that regard, I congratulate Ms. Sigrid
Kaag on her appointment as Senior Humanitarian
and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza. The entire
international community will have to mobilize to
rebuild Gaza. The situation in the West Bank requires
our full attention. The attacks by violent settlers against
Palestinian civilians is unacceptable. Once again, we
condemn them in the strongest terms. They must end
now. At the right time, together with its partners, France
will take the necessary initiatives so that the Council is
seized of all of these political issues.
Lastly, the third principle of our action will be that of
responsibility, given the risks of further escalation. We
must do our utmost to prevent a regional conflagration
and further spread of the conflict. Some might be
tempted to use groups that are loyal to them to add to the
chaos and undermine stability in the region. We have a
warning for them. We are seriously concerned about
heightened tensions around the Blue Line. We call on
the parties to exercise strict restraint and do their utmost
to bring a definitive end to the escalation. The United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon must be allowed to
discharge its mandate under the proper conditions.
We are also concerned about the attacks committed
by the Houthis in the Red Sea. These are extremely
serious violations of the law and of international trade.
France will continue to shoulder its responsibilities.
In the same vein, we condemn the violations of
Iraq’s sovereignty.
France will continue to work and take the initiative
to ensure that our Council discusses all aspects of the
crisis so that it can finally condemn the barbarous
attacks of 7 October. That is to ensure that international
humanitarian law is respected and responds to the needs
of the civilian population in Gaza to make progress,
once and for all, towards a resolution to the conflict
and the two-State solution. The Council can count on
our commitment.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
National Community Abroad of Algeria.
Mr. Attaf (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I cannot begin my remarks without conveying,
within the context of today’s Council debate, a message
from my President, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, to the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and to the
various bodies of the United Nations system expressing
his appreciation and gratitude for all their efforts to
alleviate the suffering of Gaza, heal its wounds and put
an end to the bloodshed. It is a message of support and
appreciation for their tireless efforts despite attempts
to damage their credibility and authority, along with
provocations and blackmailing by an occupying Power
whose tyranny knows no bounds.
The Secretary-General has our utmost respect
and encouragement. At the same time, we pay tribute
to all those who served humankind under the flag of
the United Nations and lost their lives in Gaza as they
defended the loftiest of ideals. Similarly, we convey a
message of mercy for the souls of the martyrs who died
for their homeland and for their cause, a homeland that
was theirs and a cause that is theirs and ours.
The aggression against Gaza is about to enter
its fifth month, and the likelihood of dissuading the

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
10/59 24-01767
Israeli occupation from continuing its aggression is nil.
Such a situation imposes three main challenges. The
first challenge is ensuring respect for United Nations
resolutions. It is unacceptable to tolerate serious
violations of the resolutions that it adopts for civilized
coexistence among its members. The second challenge
is ensuring that no Member State sets itself above all
others and benefits from special treatment through
exemptions, exceptions, privileges and unwarranted
and unacceptable immunities. The third challenge is
subjecting the Israeli settlement occupying Power to
international legal controls and strictly ending the lack
of accountability and impunity.
Algeria would welcome and commend efforts
putting an end to the preferential treatment received
by some. We note the commendable and courageous
initiatives to compel the Israeli occupying Power
to shoulder its responsibilities. I would mention
specifically the initiative of President Abdelmadjid
Tebboune to bring together lawyers and various
international judicial organizations to bring the Israeli
occupying Power to justice before international bodies
in order to end the decades of impunity and lack of
accountability it has enjoyed. I would also mention the
initiative by the Republic of South Africa, which has
petitioned the International Court of Justice in relation
to the genocidal war waged by the Israeli occupying
Power against Gaza.
There are other initiatives, such as those by Chile
and Mexico to seize the International Criminal Court
of the various types of crimes being committed by the
Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip. All those
initiatives should be supported, commended and
encouraged as steps in the right direction.
We call on the international judicial bodies to
assume their responsibilities and fully implement
their mandate. We also underscore the need for the
Security Council to shoulder its political and security
responsibilities as the primary organ that protects and
ensures international peace and security.
Speaking of the responsibilities and duties linked to
the current situation in Gaza, there is no doubt that the
utmost priority is to ensure a ceasefire. Every day more
rejection and resentment are expressed for the delaying
of the ceasefire and for it not being given the attention it
deserves. Currently, there is no higher goal than that of
ending the ongoing aggression, genocide, displacement,
starvation, destruction, vandalism and desecration.
When those goals are reached, the talk about post-
war arrangements will have meaning and the diplomatic
efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict can be
effective. There is no doubt that what is happening in Gaza
today highlights more than ever before the urgent need
to address the root causes of the conflict by intensifying
and reiterating our collective commitment to a two-
State solution, which the international community has
rallied around as a just, lasting and definitive solution.
We need to see a resolute response from the Security
Council and our Organization to the Israeli voices that
have loudly rejected that solution, underestimating the
global consensus and expressing nothing but denial and
contempt for international legitimacy.
From this Chamber, Algeria reiterates its support
for granting the State of Palestine full membership
in the United Nations. That was the call made at the
most recent summit of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries as an urgent measure to preserve the basic
foundations of a two-State solution and an integral step in
maintaining the legal components for the establishment
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State
across the 1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. We also call for adopting a new approach aimed
at activating the peace option and achieving a fair and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question.
In these decisive times, it is vital that we oppose the
illusion of the Israeli settler occupation that security
can be achieved by eliminating the Palestinian national
project. It is vital that we prevent and ultimately end
the continuing occupation campaign to seize and annex
Palestinian lands and encourage the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements, designed to make it
impossible to establish an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State. It is vital that we resist the Israeli
occupation and its fantasies of reviving the project of
building a Greater Israel on the rubble, ashes and debris
of the Palestinian national project.
In view of all those considerations, Algeria
reiterates the historical demand that an international
peace conference be convened under United Nations
auspices, with a view to reaching an agreement to
definitively end the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and
the concept of a two-State solution, under the strict
supervision, close follow-up and assured guarantees of
the international community.
After Gaza, we cannot return to what was before.
After Gaza, we cannot put the Palestinian question

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 11/59
back in a drawer and leave it trapped there for another
indefinite period. After Gaza, we cannot limit
international efforts to tending to the legacy of war
and turning a blind eye to the war’s causes. Above all,
we cannot allow the goal of peace and security in the
Middle East to be held hostage by the Israeli occupation,
which does whatever it pleases by wheeling and
dealing, flattering and pressuring others. May Gaza be
a lesson for us all, a lesson to be learned, to be inspired
by and to strengthen our upcoming endeavours. Most
importantly, may it be a lesson that we do not forget.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of Slovenia.
Ms. Fajon (Slovenia): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing and you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s high-level debate.
I have a single message today, and it is a clear one.
We need an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and the region.
I would therefore like to try to explain our reasoning
behind the call for a ceasefire.
Only a ceasefire respected by all the parties to the
conflict can ensure the protection of civilians. The more
than 100 days of the conflict have led to too many civilian
casualties on all sides — one in every 100 Palestinians
in Gaza has been killed, and enough is enough. The
vast majority of those killed in Gaza are women and
children. The living are starving in overcrowded and
unsafe shelters with a health system that has collapsed.
Only a ceasefire can enable the delivery of humanitarian
assistance at the scale required. The humanitarian
community has an impossible mission as it faces a
multitude of challenges. For the sake of humanity, we
must lay the foundations for meaningful humanitarian
action, and it is our collective responsibility to do so.
Only a ceasefire can create the conditions for the
safe return of the displaced. I want to make it clear that
we reject and condemn the statements by Israeli officials
proposing the mass displacement of Palestinians from
Gaza. However, we are also deeply concerned about
the conditions that the internally displaced Palestinians
in Gaza are living in. People are forced to flee again
and again and are being pushed into safe zones that are
subsequently bombed anyway. We need to establish the
conditions for people’s safe return on all sides — in
Gaza, the West Bank, Israel and Lebanon.
Only a ceasefire and a renewed vision of a two-State
solution can prevent the proliferation of extremism and
extremist ideologies. Slovenia condemns all forms of
terror, including Hamas’s terrorist attacks of 7 October
and its continuing attacks on Israel. We repeat our
call for the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages and for the International Committee of the
Red Cross to be granted access to them. A ceasefire
has to bring them home, and only a ceasefire can bring
about the conditions for peace. The current hostilities
and decades of tensions are providing neither peace nor
security for anyone in the region. There is no military
solution to the conflict, and the only way to peace is
through a two-State solution. I therefore repeat my
call for us to start preparing an international peace
conference to address all the puzzle pieces of a two-
State solution in a comprehensive manner. We must be
serious about that. As the Security Council, we need to
advance discussions about the day after. Gaza and the
West Bank belong to Palestinians.
A ceasefire will also enable accountability. We
cannot turn a blind eye to all the violations that have
taken place in recent months, from the terrorist attack
on 7 October and the reports of sexual violence by
Hamas to all the other violations of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law. A strong international legal system is a
guarantee of international peace and security.
Only a ceasefire will help to calm the region. In my
most recent speech before the Council (see S/PV.9489),
I spoke of a potential spillover. I am afraid that this
conflict has already generated further escalation in the
West Bank, along the Blue Line and in the Red Sea,
or served as a pretext to generate such escalation. We
condemn the Houthi attacks in the Red Sea, which
must immediately cease. The freedom of navigation
and maritime security are critically important for the
movement of essential goods, including food, fuel
and critical humanitarian assistance intended to reach
populations across the world. Tensions in the region
are mounting, and we will soon reach a point of no
return. A ceasefire will enable the reconstruction of
Gaza under the leadership of a revitalized Palestinian
Authority, with the strong support of the United Nations
and the international community. By “ceasefire”,
I mean a process starting with the cessation of
hostilities respected by all parties to the conflict and
incorporating all of the elements mentioned, leading
to an independent Palestinian State, a safe and secure
Israel, a peaceful region and the people of all countries
in the region living free of fear and terror.

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
12/59 24-01767
The 26,000 victims — Palestinian and Israeli
alike — are not statistics. Each of them had a life,
family, dreams, hopes and plans. The best way for us
to show respect to those who have lost their lives in
the conflict is to pave the way for peace. It is time for
a ceasefire.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Federal Councillor and Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.
Mr. Cassis (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and express my heartfelt condolences to
him on the loss of his 153 humanitarian colleagues.
Switzerland shares the principles of humanity and
peace that guide the work of the Security Council. We
reiterate our unequivocal condemnation of Hamas’s
attacks on Israel and demand the immediate and
unconditional release of all hostages held by Hamas.
The statements made in this Chamber remind us of the
extreme level of hatred and suffering in the Middle
East that has been reached. While, since 7 October,
there has seemed to be no limit to the violence in Israel
and Gaza and throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, one question in particular has concerned me:
What can we do about it? The Council has adopted
two undeniably critical resolutions (resolution 2712
(2023) and resolution 2720 (2023)), but we are failing to
implement them. Only some of the hostages have been
released; civilian casualties from the fighting continue
on a daily basis: and international humanitarian law
continues to be violated, all of which is happening as
we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions.
When we see that, despite all our efforts and all
the energy that the Council has put into the adoption
of those two resolutions, the violence continues, only
one word comes to mind: “frustration”. But we cannot
give into frustration. We cannot allow ourselves to
become discouraged. In the face of such inhumanity,
we have no right to do so. If we are to work together to
find a solution commensurate with our responsibilities,
we need to take a step back and address, without fear
of raising taboo subjects, the obstacles preventing the
Council from doing its job.
I would like to stress three major points that must
be taken into account on the road to lasting peace in the
Middle East.
First, the world has changed. The Middle East is no
longer same region that it was at the time of the Camp
David Agreement or the Oslo Accords. The States of
the region have evolved a great deal. They are voicing
their legitimate aspirations. Those States now want to
play a key role. No lasting peace in the Middle East will
be possible without a regional political consensus.
Secondly, Israel has shaped a new diplomatic
dynamic within the region. I see that as a sign that there
is political common ground and that common interests
have been mutually acknowledged for both the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples.
Thirdly, lasting peace continues to fundamentally
depend on a two-State solution. That is the solution
that will provide both Israelis and Palestinians with the
possibility of living in peace and security.
I would like to cite Eleanor Roosevelt, who said,
(spoke in English)
“It isn’t enough to talk about peace. One must
believe in it. And it isn’t enough to believe in it.
One must work at it”.
(spoke in French)
We can no longer simply manage the conflict, which the
current impasse that we are at in Gaza demonstrates.
We have reached a tipping point. We must now take
further concrete steps towards a political resolution of
the conflict, which has already cost the lives of far too
many people.
How do we take concrete action? I call for a joint
approach. We must all work towards that end — the
parties to the conflict, the States of the region, which
I stress, and the members of the Council. Together
we must imagine a future based on a comprehensive
approach that includes all the key elements of the
conflict. By that I mean the release of the remaining
hostages, a humanitarian ceasefire, unimpeded access
to humanitarian aid and unconditional respect for
international humanitarian law against, all of which
must be against the backdrop of a political solution. I am
well aware that those elements are part of the concerns
of the Council, but we must think of them within a new
geography of peace.
Your country, France, Mr. President, was the cradle
of the Enlightenment. You will certainly understand my
approach, which sees critical thinking and questioning
as the driving force that will enable us to move forward

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 13/59
and overcome challenges to reach the light of peace.
I believe that all of us here at the United Nations can
come together and change our outlook. Some will
think that that is a utopian vision. But I prefer utopias
to dystopias. Together with everyone, including the
Israelis, the Palestinians and the States of the region,
Switzerland is ready to play its role in this difficult,
but critical process, to achieve peace. We stand ready
to bring together the key players in the conflict and
support all efforts to pave the road towards achieving
peace, such as the one put forward by the European
Union yesterday.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, first and foremost the Palestinian question, and
our discussion come at a truly dramatic moment. Not
only major political considerations but also universal
human morality demand that we take urgent action to
bring about a ceasefire and end the human suffering
in Palestine. Steps to prevent further destabilization in
other parts of the Middle East are also required. The
Security Council has thus far been unable to respond
adequately to this historic challenge. The reason is
well-known — the position of the United States, which
has blocked all efforts and initiatives aimed at stopping
the bloodshed in the occupied territories. The cunning
of American diplomacy is astonishing, oscillating
between vetoing ceasefire resolutions and calling for a
reduction in the intensity of hostilities in Gaza. Clearly,
it serves as carte blanche for the collective punishment
of Palestinians to continue.
Yesterday we made yet another attempt to elicit a
united response from the Council to what was happening
and proposed a draft presidential statement demanding
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire. However, the
United States and its allies blocked that document, too,
thereby confirming that saving the lives of Palestinian
civilians is not one of their priorities. The humanitarian
consequences of such a policy are dire: almost 30,000
civilians, including a large number of women and
children, have been killed; northern Gaza is almost
completely destroyed and uninhabitable; and 80 per
cent of the overall population in the Gaza Strip are
internally displaced persons. It is a true humanitarian
tragedy, with no end in sight.
The shortage of all basic necessities has reached
alarming proportions. I would also like to draw
members’ attention to a Jerusalem Post article dated
6 January, which interviewed a professor from Ben-
Gurion University, Ms. Nitzan. She previously worked
as a coordinator at the World Health Organization
(WHO), focusing on emergencies. The article draws
on assessments from environmental experts, including
Israeli experts. According to those assessments, there
are doubts as to whether Gaza will be inhabitable once
the conflict ends. The soil, subsoil, coastal waters and
air have all been polluted on an unprecedented scale
by the bombardments, by the chemicals that have been
released from explosions and fires, by the equipment
and ammunition that have been disposed of, and by
the biomass that is now rotting — as awful as that
sounds — in addition to other household waste and
sewage. There are no more natural water sources.
Practically all of the sanitation infrastructure is gone.
It is estimated that 22 per cent of agricultural land
in Gaza will never be restored. We have seen tens of
thousands of cases of diarrhoea, acute respiratory
illnesses, scabies, skin diseases and other diseases. We
have seen an increased risk of an epidemic. The lack of
humanitarian access has been recognized by the WHO
as the main obstacle to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Specifically, the WHO has had to call off
six of its planned humanitarian missions in the north
of the Gaza Strip, starting from the end of December
2023, because its requests for access were denied.
In order to alleviate the suffering of the people of
Gaza, Russia, like a number of other countries, has
sent hundreds of tons of food, medical equipment and
medicines to the Gaza Strip. We support the efforts of
United Nations humanitarian agencies on the ground,
which, unfortunately, have also fallen victim to the war,
with roughly 150 deaths. The Secretary-General just
told us about that, stating that it is unprecedented in the
history of United Nations involvement in operations in
conflict zones.
Of particular concern is the dissemination of
abhorrent ideas such as the mass forcible displacement
of Palestinians from their homes. Such a scenario is
unacceptable and should not be allowed to come to pass
under any circumstances. The mass violence being
inflicted by the Israeli army and Jewish settlers in the
West Bank must also be stopped immediately, and any
attempt to undermine the status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem must be thwarted.
The Council’s inability to take exhaustive measures
has allowed the current escalation of the conflict

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
14/59 24-01767
in Palestine to metastasize throughout the region.
Again, that is not without the nefarious participation
of the United States and its allies, whose military
presence in the Middle East, as in other parts of the
Eurasian continent, is creating unacceptable new risks
to international security. We categorically condemn
the wholly unjustified aggression against Yemen
undertaken under the leading role of the United States
and the United Kingdom without the approval of the
Council. The actions of the Anglo-Saxons pose a direct
threat to international peace and undermine the world
order, which is not based on the Anglo-Saxons’ rules but
on the rule of international law and the central role of
the United Nations. We also condemn the Israeli strikes
on Syria, the stated targets of which are the structures
that are legally located in Syria at the invitation of
its legitimate Government. Political assassinations
must end.
The situation on the Israeli-Lebanese border is also
particularly dangerous. It is obvious that unilateral
military actions only exacerbate the already difficult
situation in the Middle East. It is a situation that did not
just develop yesterday and reflects a long history. We
are talking about the repeated invasions of independent
States by the United States and its satellites, which
led to hundreds of thousands of deaths in Iraq, the
destruction of statehood in Libya, the war in Syria,
massive flows of refugees and an unprecedented surge
in international terrorism.
Russia will not accept terrorism in any form. We
categorically condemned the attacks on civilians in
Israel on 7 October 2023. Unlike some of our Western
colleagues, who practise double standards, we do not
divide extremists into good and bad, us and them. We
insist on the release of all detainees in Gaza, regardless
of their nationality and origin.
Today, what we hear increasingly often, particularly
from our Western colleagues, are calls to focus not
on today but on the day after the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, as if the escalation in Gaza had already ceased
and the situation there no longer required the Council’s
attention. But the cunning logic of Western delegations
is obvious: by blocking all of the Council’s much-
needed efforts to call on the parties to a ceasefire, the
United States and its allies want to turn this extremely
uncomfortable page in their history as soon as possible,
which makes them complicit in the carnage unleashed
on the peaceful civilian population in Gaza.
I would like to emphasize that the Security
Council must continue to fulfil its mandate and call
for a ceasefire. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that
hostilities will not resume with renewed vigour. In
the absence of such a guarantee and the unconditional
implementation of United Nations decisions on the
creation of a Palestinian State, all talk of tomorrow
is not only premature but also pointless. That is well
understood by potential donors who could invest in
the future reconstruction of Gaza. When it comes to
discussing the parameters of tomorrow, the following
two factors of fundamental importance should be taken
into consideration.
First, there is the consolidated will of the Palestinian
people themselves. The Palestinians, who have been
deprived of the chance of statehood for decades, deserve
for that issue to be finally resolved. The first and main
condition for that is the unity of the Palestinian nation
itself. We trust that our Palestinian brothers and sisters
will show strategic wisdom and reject all short-term
considerations and any internal fighting, which impede
nation-building. They should decide for themselves
what their future State should look like, who should
govern it and how. I think that that is what our Western
colleagues call democracy.
The imposition of solutions from the outside and
the social engineering so beloved by our Western
colleagues are categorically unacceptable here. At the
same time, no less important is the unity of the positions
of all external players, who should be guided not by
their political interests in the region, trying to pursue
them through various Palestinian factions, but by the
imperative of finding a speedy solution to the centuries-
old conflict. Russia has made its proposals on how to
achieve that objective. They could become an important
element of a new effective mediation mechanism that
would enjoy the trust of both Palestinians and Israelis.
We will continue working towards that.
Another key factor is the unshakeable foundation of
the two-State solution for a settlement of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict, and it will be crucial for it to happen
as soon as possible. We are extremely concerned about
the Israeli leadership’s statement calling that into
question. We also want to draw attention to the vague
statements made in that regard by senior officials of the
United States Department of State. We do not want to
see Washington once again relying on its supposedly
effective — but in fact utterly failed — bilateral
diplomacy, hoping that somehow, ahead of its elections

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 15/59
in November, it can fix parameters for a settlement
in the Middle East that suit Washington, without any
regard for the long-term consequences.
We have seen this many times. Every turn of the
United States’ arrogant, unilateral policy in the Middle
East, with its separate shuttle negotiations with regional
players accompanied by financial promises, ends with
an increasingly bloody eruption into escalation, just
as has happened this time. Washington first buried
the work of the Middle East Quartet and since then
has consistently blocked all international efforts for
de-escalation within the framework of the Security
Council. The cynical short-sightedness of the United
States leadership was exemplified just a week before
7 October by the words of Jake Sullivan, the National
Security Advisor to the President, when he said that
the Middle East was quieter today than it had been in
two decades.
I want to say to my Western colleagues that
the whole world is waiting for them to realize that
their stubborn disregard for and outright sabotage of
multilateral diplomacy brings tragic results over and
over again. For Russia, along with an overwhelming
majority of the international community, it is obvious
that the logic of confrontation on the question of
Palestine can be overcome only through collective
efforts underpinned, first and foremost, by the interests
of the States of the region. It is they that should
ultimately decide the fate of the Palestinian issue. The
green shoots of those positive processes are already
emerging. The normalization of relations between Iran
and Saudi Arabia has begun with China’s help, Syria’s
membership in the Arab League has been restored, and
a dialogue is being established between Damascus and
Ankara. It is the job of any international mediation
efforts not to interfere with those processes or turn the
region into an arena for geopolitical struggle, but rather
to create the most favourable external conditions for
restoring trust between the countries of the region.
That is what Russia’s initiatives for a Middle East
settlement are aimed at. After the acute phase of the
current crisis is over — which should be facilitated
by a united call from the Security Council for a
ceasefire — we propose convening consultations at the
ministerial level to consolidate the positions of the key
regional players and develop practical steps on that basis
to help restore Palestinian unity. At the next stage we
will require the format of an international conference
on a Middle East settlement, as many representatives
who spoke before me have said. The purpose of the
conference would be to proclaim a Palestinian State
and develop measures to ensure Israel’s lasting security
and normalize its relations with all Arab States and
with Muslim States generally. Incidentally, I think it
was 15 years ago that Russia put forward the idea here
in this Chamber of convening such a conference, and
I hope the idea will receive the attention it deserves.
What also remains on the table is the broader initiative
of creating a system of collective security in the Persian
Gulf and the Middle East as a whole, a system that
would enshrine confidence-building and transparency
measures and guarantee equal security for every
country in the region. As the Council is aware, Russia
has specific proposals in that regard that we have long
been discussing with all interested parties. All of that
represents our vision for the way forward, but first, I
repeat, we must achieve a ceasefire in the Palestinian
territories without delay.
In conclusion, I would like to once again call on
Council members not to be lulled by the United States’
assurances that it supposedly has everything under
control and is resolving the problems on the ground, and
not to once again put off the question of establishing a
Palestinian State until things improve. It is important
not only for the Security Council to reaffirm that there
can be no alternative to the existing international legal
framework on this critical issue but also to outline
concrete ways and timelines for its realization. That
is not just obligations emanating from the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Council, the Madrid
principles and other decisions. It is the moral duty
of the international community, and we call for it to
be fulfilled.
Today some delegations saw fit to reiterate the
memorized list of accusations against Russia in
connection with our special military operation against
the Nazi regime in Kyiv. I will leave those statements
to their consciences, although, of course, I realize that
their consciences do not bother them very much. I
would like to underscore one vital thing at issue. We
do not have the right to allow a decision of the United
Nations on the creation of a Palestinian State to be
buried in the way that the 2015 Minsk agreements,
which were unanimously approved by the Council,
were. They were guaranteed by France and Germany,
which later admitted that they had never planned to
implement them. We cannot allow the possibility of
such criminal actions being taken again, this time
against the Palestinian people.

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
16/59 24-01767
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Chief Minister of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Sengeh (Sierra Leone): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important
ministerial-level meeting. I am also grateful to
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.
“The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question” has been a long-standing item on
the Security Council’s agenda. The recent escalation
since 7 October of last year indicates that arriving at
a definitive solution is a matter of extreme urgency.
And it is very clear that the situation continues to have
far-reaching implications for regional stability, global
peace and security.
Global peace is possible, and we have to work
together for it. This protracted conflict must be analysed
in the context of Israel’s continuing occupation of
the Palestinian territories. We must vigorously and
persistently pursue a consensus based on a just, mutually
acceptable solution, consistent with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
With regard to the current escalation, Sierra Leone
condemns in the strongest terms Hamas’s heinous
attack of 7 October on Israeli civilians, which according
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs led to the killing of more than 1,200 Israelis and
foreign nationals, including 36 children, with reports
of the perpetration of sexual violence and the taking
of civilian hostages. We want to emphasize that those
responsible must be held accountable. Sierra Leone
calls for the release of all hostages, immediately and
without conditions.
Sierra Leone is gravely concerned about the
escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip over the past
100 days, which has led to the death of more than
25,000 Palestinian civilians and the displacement
of 1.9 million more, with women and children being
the worst affected. We deeply regret the unacceptable
human cost, including the ultimate price that has been
paid by health-care workers, United Nations personnel
and other humanitarian workers and journalists. We
express our deepest condolences to the families of the
more than 150 United Nations personnel who have lost
their lives in the course of their duties, the vast majority
of whom were staff of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Sierra Leone acknowledges the Security Council’s
engagement since the start of the conflict and the
significant efforts that were made to adopt resolutions
2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023). Those resolutions reaffirm
the need for the parties to the conflict to adhere to
their obligations under international law and ensure
the protection of all civilians, in particular children.
Between the adoptions of resolutions 2712 (2023) and
2720 (2023), the Secretary-General invoked Article
99 of the Charter of the United Nations (S/2023/962),
which was last done more than 50 years ago, warning
the Security Council of an impending humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza and calling for an immediate
humanitarian ceasefire. Although the Council fell short
of demanding a ceasefire, Sierra Leone welcomed the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2712 (2023) (see S/2024/26), as mandated
in resolution 2720 (2023). The report informed us of the
appointment of Ms. Sigrid Kaag as Senior Humanitarian
and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza and outlined
some of the progress made in addressing the existing
humanitarian catastrophe in the Gaza Strip. We
welcome Ms. Kaag’s appointment, and Sierra Leone
looks forward to engaging with her in the near future.
For the many civilian lives lost, at risk or in
serious straits, Sierra Leone calls for an immediate
humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza. That will guarantee
the safety of all civilians, protect civilian objects
and enable humanitarian assistance to reach those in
need unimpeded. For any humanitarian operation to
be successful in the Gaza Strip, securing a full and
comprehensive ceasefire is the minimum required.
Before I conclude, and in addition to calling for
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, I would like to
make the following critical observations.
First, Sierra Leone is deeply concerned about the
fact that Israel’s ongoing military operation has been
accompanied by rhetoric on the forcible displacement
of Palestinians from Israeli political actors. Sierra
Leone condemns that rhetoric and rejects any attempt
to remove Palestinians from the Gaza Strip or the West
Bank, temporarily or permanently.
Secondly, Sierra Leone calls for accountability for
all responsible for violations of international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, and for crimes
of serious concern to the international community.
Thirdly, Sierra Leone notes with concern the
rising tensions in the West Bank, across the Blue Line
in Lebanon, in the Red Sea, including in Yemen, and
in other parts of the region. Sierra Leone calls on the

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 17/59
relevant parties to desist from embarking on any action
that will further endanger the lives of civilians, escalate
regional tensions or threaten global peace and security.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone emphasizes the
importance of continuing to explore all diplomatic and
political avenues geared to finding a just and lasting
solution to the conflict and based on a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living together side
by side in peace, security and stability.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): I too would like
to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his very
detailed introduction to today’s very important debate.
What is very clear is that the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza is worsening daily. People have lost their families
and their homes. Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
are now facing the risk of famine. Their suffering is
frankly unacceptable, and our priority must be to
alleviate it.
Last month, together with my Foreign Secretary,
Lord Cameron, I visited Al-Arish, near the Rafah
crossing. Among other engagements, it was a privilege
to meet staff of the Egyptian Red Crescent Society, who
along with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and many other
international organizations are working tirelessly to get
life-saving aid into Gaza. I would like to put it on record
that we sincerely commend all the United Nations and
humanitarian teams for their ongoing work amid hugely
difficult conditions on the ground. As we have heard,
many have already paid with their lives. I have also
heard first-hand reports of what can only be described
as shocking and harrowing medical operations and
procedures taking place, including on young children,
in desperate conditions with no anaesthesia, against
a backdrop of mass burials. To put it succinctly and
directly, that must end.
Agreements are needed now. The United Kingdom
is calling for an immediate humanitarian pause, which is
necessary to get life-saving aid in and hostages out. We
must alleviate the pain and suffering of all. At the same
time, and in accordance with resolution 2720 (2023), we
urgently call on Israel to significantly increase the flow
of aid into Gaza, including by opening Ashdod port and
increasing access through Kerem Shalom. That needs
to happen, and it needs to happen now. The United
Kingdom has trebled its financial aid commitment to
support Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories this year. I want to assure the Council that
we will continue to do everything we can to get more
aid in and open more crossings.
Yes, the United Kingdom supports Israel’s right to
self-defence, but that must be in line with international
humanitarian law. And of course, like others, we
condemn all forms of terrorism. Hamas’s horrific
terrorist attacks have had an irreversible impact on
innocent lives. I have seen that first-hand, as I did last
week in my meetings with the Foreign Secretary with
families of some of the hostages still held in Gaza.
But what is very clear is that the conflict must
not go on a moment longer than necessary. We must
collectively work for a sustainable ceasefire that will
end the shocking destruction, the fighting and the loss
of life and prevent a resumption of hostilities. What do
we need to do to achieve that? Hamas will have to agree
to release all hostages. It can no longer be in charge
of Gaza, and it must no longer pose a threat to Israel
through terror attacks. We also need an agreement
in place for the return of the Palestinian Authority to
Gaza, as well as the complete rejection of any forced
displacement of Palestinians from Gaza.
Peace remains the only way to once and for all end
the tragedy and suffering that have engulfed Israelis
and Palestinians. Stability, peace, justice and security
are the only way forward. For a peaceful solution, four
things must also happen. There must be a Palestinian-
led Government in Gaza and across the West Bank;
there must be a concrete plan to help revitalize and
support the Palestinian Authority; there must be a
massive reconstruction plan for Gaza and, importantly,
there must be a political horizon for the delivery of a
two-State solution.
Now is the time, in the tragedy that is engulfing
us, to grasp the moment, to choose hope over despair
and peace over conflict, and to once again commit to
working together to make that vision for peace a true
living reality of two States, Israel and Palestine, side by
side in the Middle East.
Ms. Zeya (United States of America): I thank you
for convening us, Mr. President, and I thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his briefing today.
In November I visited Al-Arish, where I saw
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners’
life-saving work and action. In the wake of that visit,
the United States facilitated an extended humanitarian
pause during which hostages were reunited with their
loved ones and more aid got into the hands of Palestinians

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
18/59 24-01767
in Gaza. Since then, Israel, Egypt and Jordan, with the
support and encouragement of the United States, have
also taken steps to expand the flow of aid into Gaza,
opening Kerem Shalom and establishing a new route
from Jordan. But more needs to be done to rapidly
provide assistance at scale for civilians in all of Gaza.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment
of Sigrid Kaag as the new Senior Humanitarian and
Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza, charged with
this mission. She must have the resources and support
she needs because her success is the success of the
United Nations in Gaza. And the Organization’s role is
irreplaceable.
Secretary Blinken was pleased to have secured
Israeli support for a United Nations assessment team
to visit northern Gaza, including support for a surge
in aid to civilians in the north, who have largely
lacked access to aid for more than a month and are
increasingly desperate. We urge that visit to happen as
soon as it is safe to do so, as it is a critical step to assess
the humanitarian situation and enable the ultimate
voluntary safe return home for those displaced by the
fighting. The perilous security situation in northern
Gaza, driven by renewed Hamas rocketing of Israel and
attacks, has delayed that assessment.
We reiterate that there can be no forced relocation
of Palestinians and that Palestinian civilians must be
allowed to voluntarily and safely return home, with
dignity, as soon as conditions allow. Furthermore, we
reject calls for a relocation of Palestinians outside of
Gaza and the dehumanizing language used by some
officials on all sides of the conflict. We continue to
convey to Israeli leaders that they need to do more
to protect civilians and take feasible precautions to
minimize civilian harm, in line with international
humanitarian law.
Far too many Palestinian civilians have been injured
or killed in Gaza since 7 October. More needs to be done
to protect them. United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel are demonstrating extraordinary courage and
also require greater protection. Many are themselves
displaced. We mourn the loss of more than 150 staff of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the largest collective loss of
personnel in the Organization’s history.
Continued incidents during the past week
demonstrate that deconfliction remains a serious
problem. That must change. The United States
joins other Council members in reaffirming that
humanitarian personnel must be protected so that they
can save other lives. In addition, they require reliable
access to telecommunication services in Gaza to do
their jobs safely.
We also remain concerned about the current
intense fighting around major hospitals in western
Khan Younis. The protected nature of those facilities
must be respected so that they can continue to provide
civilians with medical assistance. Hamas and other
terrorist groups must not use hospitals or other civilian
infrastructure to launch attacks, and civilians must be
permitted to reach hospitals.
We must not forget that Hamas’s brutal terrorist
attacks on Israel unleashed this conflict. The eyewitness
accounts of Hamas atrocities and conflict-related
sexual violence against innocent women are undisputed
and horrific. Hamas has continued its abhorrent use of
Palestinian civilians and hostages as human shields, and
its repeated statements affirming its intent to repeat the
7 October attacks underscore why we can never go back
to the reality in Gaza before 7 October.
There also can be no progress towards a durable
peace without resolution of the hostage crisis. More
than 100 individuals are still held in Gaza by Hamas
and other armed groups. The hostages continue to
be kept from their loved ones and are denied access
to humanitarian services. For more than 100 days,
hostages and their families have lived in agony. No
one should have to endure even one day of what they
have gone through, much less over 100 days. It is time
for the Council to unequivocally condemn Hamas’s
atrocities and terror and to reiterate its demand that
Hamas immediately release all the hostages and allow
medical access. In that regard, we welcome the Qatari
and French announcement of an agreement to deliver
medicine to hostages and medical facilities in Gaza.
The United States has repeatedly warned Iran and
its proxies not to engage in opportunistic attacks that
risk instigating a wider conflict. We condemn Iran’s
attacks, which harmed and killed civilians, on locations
in Iraq and Pakistan. We also condemn the Houthis’
attacks on commercial vessels in the Red Sea, which, as
resolution 2722 (2024) rightly demanded, must cease.
We know that without Iran’s support, the Houthis would
struggle to track and strike commercial vessels. We seek
a diplomatic solution along the Blue Line that would
allow civilians in Israel and Lebanon to return home.
We again call for the full implementation of resolution

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 19/59
1701 (2006). And let me be clear. The United States will
continue to take defensive actions, as appropriate and
in line with international law, to protect our personnel
and interests in the region.
We are also deeply troubled by the situation
in the West Bank, where forced displacement and
unprecedented levels of violence by extremist settlers
present an urgent threat to peace and stability. We
condemn the killing of Palestinian civilians, and we
urge Israel to prevent and investigate settler violence,
as well as hold perpetrators accountable.
As we respond to the Gaza crisis, a key component
of United States diplomacy is to pursue a pathway
both to a Palestinian State and to normalization and
integration between Israel and other regional States,
some of whom join us today for this open debate. The
goal is a future where Gaza is never again used as a
platform for terror and where Palestinians have a State
of their own, Israel’s security is assured and Israelis
and Arabs can live in peace.
Secretary Blinken recently heard from countries
of the region a willingness to participate in the
reconstruction of Gaza if there is a path to a Palestinian
State. A stronger, reformed and revitalized Palestinian
Authority that can more effectively deliver for its own
people and both the West Bank and Gaza must also be
a part of the equation. I know that this may be difficult
to imagine at this difficult moment, but it is President
Biden’s firm conviction that two States, with Israel’s
security guaranteed, are the only path to durable peace,
as well as the only guarantor of a secure and democratic
Israel and of Palestinians’ legitimate aspirations to live
in a State of their own. It is the only way to end this
violence once and for all.
To achieve that future, the Israeli and Palestinian
people, as well as their leaders, must make hard
choices. We do not purport to make those decisions for
them. But we believe strongly that if they are willing
to pursue these goals, they can help to usher in an era
where Palestinians and Israelis can live side by side
in peace.
On a final point, we lament that Russia ignored
several Council members’ requests to condemn Hamas
for their attacks on 7 October in the draft presidential
statement circulated late last week. It is bewildering that
the Council still cannot condemn Hamas for its heinous
terrorist attack that killed more than 1,200 individuals
from over 30 nations in Israel on 7 October or that the
Council cannot, without qualification, reiterate its call
for the release of the more than 100 hostages held by
Hamas and other terrorist groups.
We and others offered input to this product in good
faith, and our input is consistent with what we have
advocated for since 7 October. Russia’s choice to reject
those edits only underscores its cynical approach to
the work of the Council, as it chooses to try to divide
the Council rather than bring it together to address
global challenges.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I wish to thank
France for convening this important Security Council
meeting, and I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing on the current catastrophe
in Gaza.
One hundred and nine days have now passed
since 7 October, when 1,200 men and women, girls
and boys and young and old civilians in Israel were
brutally massacred by Hamas. We once again condemn
the heinous terrorist attacks by Hamas and urge the
immediate and unconditional release of all remaining
hostages. The accounts of sexual violence committed by
Hamas must be fully investigated, and all perpetrators
must be held accountable.
We have also witnessed the extreme suffering
of Palestinians in Gaza. More than 25,000 people
have reportedly been killed during Israeli military
operations in Gaza. Seventy per cent of those killed
are women and children. Every day, we see and hear
their tears, their fears, their cries and their pleas for
protection against a backdrop of air strikes, looming
famine and displacement. Tragically, people can get
easily accustomed and desensitized to ever-increasing
casualty numbers — 100 and 200 sound different, while
24,000 and 25,000 may sound similar. No, they are not.
They too had happiness and dreams like us. Everything
they strived for is now under the rubble. United
Nations workers have not been safe in this conflict
either. More United Nations staff have been lost in the
first three months of this conflict than the number of
United Nations staff lost in conflict areas and terrorist
incidents around the world in the last 12 years.
For those who have survived in Gaza, the conditions
are beyond desperate. A total of 85 per cent of Gaza’s
entire population is internally displaced, with many
families displaced multiple times. And, as hospitals and
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East facilities are besieged or

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
20/59 24-01767
under constant attacks, there is no safe place, even in
the so-called “safe zones.” Humanitarian assistance
is not enough, and even the insufficient volume of
humanitarian aid is constantly met with obstacles
and entry impediments. In that regard, the Security
Council has adopted two resolutions (resolutions 2712
(2023) and 2720 (2023)). However, there has been
little progress on the ground. Once again, we call
for rapid, safe, unhindered, expanded and sustained
humanitarian access into and across Gaza, in line with
resolution 2720 (2023).
The Council has repeatedly urged compliance with
international humanitarian law, of which the core pillar
is the protection of civilians. However, that call has not
been heeded during this conflict. We therefore call for a
sustainable humanitarian ceasefire. All hostilities by all
parties must be ceased. All hostages must be released,
and sufficient humanitarian aid and commercial goods
must be able to enter Gaza. Only based on these
conditions can the ongoing agony of Palestinians and
the insecurity of Israelis be resolved, and sincere talks
for the realization of the two-State solution begin. To
achieve that goal, all non-State actors in the region
should also cease their provocative actions. Any action
that hinders navigational rights and freedom by the
Houthis must immediately and unconditionally stop. At
the same time, parties across the Blue Line between
Israel and Lebanon must exercise the utmost restraint
and heed the ongoing diplomatic efforts.
Israel’s right to security and the Palestinian
people’s right to live on their own land are inherently
interconnected. The permanent security of Israel can
only be guaranteed when both Israelis and Palestinians
are able to live, side by side, in peace within secure
and recognized borders, consistent with international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. In that
connection, any forcible transfer of Palestinians or
resettlement of Gaza is simply not acceptable. Settlement
activities and settler violence must also stop in the West
Bank. Any attempts against the realization of the two-
State solution must be rejected. At this perilous juncture
for the region, a sustainable humanitarian ceasefire can
serve as a meaningful starting point for the resumption
of vital talks to realize the common aspiration of the
Palestinians, Israelis and the people of the entire world.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to praise the French presidency for convening this
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. The French
initiative is particularly timely, as it translates our
collective concern over the unfolding catastrophe
in the Gaza Strip, especially in its humanitarian
dimension. We convey our most sincere appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
briefing to the Council. On these and other matters, he
has been the voice and the conscience not just of our
Organization but also of the international community
at large, particularly when invoking Article 99 of the
Charter, drawing the attention of the United Nations
membership and the entire world to the humanitarian
plight that has befallen the Palestinian people.
The conflict between Israel and Palestine is at the
heart of our concern today. It is a conflict that is further
aggravated by Israel’s illegal settlement activities,
which are contrary to international law and undermine
the prospect for an independent and sovereign State
of Palestine. We deeply deplore this ongoing conflict,
which has resulted in the loss of many lives and
has caused immense suffering to both Israelis and
Palestinians. The situation requires our objective and
urgent attention. Guided by the Charter and the relevant
decisions of this body, we need to find ways and means
of bringing about sustainable and long-lasting peace to
the region.
After more than 100 days of war, Mozambique
echoes the deepest concern expressed by several
Member States of the United Nations, including in the
Council, various entities and international organizations
on the calamitous and catastrophic situation that the
people of Gaza are facing. Following Hamas’s attacks
on 7 October 2023, which caused 1,200 Israeli deaths,
we cannot remain indifferent to what is happening in
Gaza, namely the reported killing by the Israeli Defence
Forces of nearly 25,000 people, 70 per cent of whom are
women and children.
As the Secretary-General said recently, “people
in Gaza are dying not only from bombs and bullets,
but from lack of food and clean water, and hospitals
without power and medicine”. And, as further stated
in a document by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, this is a major
human-made humanitarian disaster. Refusing water,
food and medicine to civilian and innocent people in
a war situation is contrary to the basic principles of
human dignity. The modern laws of war and our own
moral standards do not accept such a situation. The
relentless attacks against the civilian population of
Gaza must cease, as they constitute a clear violation of

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 21/59
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. In that connection, the current situation calls
for an immediate and urgent humanitarian ceasefire,
a cessation of hostilities and, ultimately, a ceasefire
not only to ensure that humanitarian aid is delivered
without restriction or hindrance to those in need in
Gaza but also to allow for the release of all the hostages
and for the peace process to commence and be allowed
to proceed.
As military operations intensify on the ground, at
a time when there is no safe place in Gaza, the ongoing
war will have major security consequences for both
the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples. It will worsen
tensions between communities and feed extremists.
Furthermore, a regional escalation of the conflict is
a clear and present danger. In a troubled region such
as the Middle East, where conflict begets conflict, we
ought to be cautious and prudent in every move we
make, in every step that we take. We need to avoid
unimaginable political and security consequences that
could jeopardize global peace and security. We are
therefore duty bound, as members of the Council, to
pool together our efforts in order to maintain peace
and international security and bring to an end the
catastrophe in Gaza. Our action and influence on the
parties to the conflict is of extreme importance. To the
extent of our individual capacity, we need to contribute
to peace, security and stability in the Middle East.
Towards the end of 2023, the Council adopted two
humanitarian resolutions (resolution 2712 (2023) and
resolution 2720 (2023)) of crucial importance which
need to be respected and observed. In that context,
we reiterate our call for an immediate and sustained
humanitarian truce and the cessation of hostilities so
that resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023) can be
implemented with the collaboration and the monitoring
of the United Nations and other relevant bodies.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our recognition
of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, national independence and sovereignty.
That is a right that is inherent to each and every people
and nation on Earth. It is also enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, and it constitutes the bedrock of
the present international legal order.
I would like to conclude my statement by reaffirming
Mozambique’s principled position. We strongly believe
that the foundation for our lasting peace and security in
the region resides in a two-State solution for Israel and
Palestine, with both States living side by side in peace
and security as good neighbours, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Uemura (Japan): I thank His Excellency
Mr. Séjourné, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
of France, for his initiative. My appreciation also goes to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.
More than 100 days have passed since 7 October.
First and foremost, I would like to extend my heartfelt
condolences to all the victims who have lost their lives
in the conflict, including United Nations staff members
and their families.
As a result of the conflict, which began with
Hamas’s heinous attack, what have we been left with?
Many innocent people have been taken hostage and
their families and loved ones are still spending sleepless
nights hoping for their release. Countless children and
women in Gaza have lost their lives with fear in their
hearts as they hear the ceaseless sound of air raids
and bombings.
That is the cruel reality of Gaza that we must face.
What is the most realistic action we can take to change
the situation?
The Security Council adopted two resolutions
(resolution 2712 (2023) and resolution 2720 (2023)),
after intense negotiations, to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. Those resolutions were the result of
the toil and sweat of Council members who desired to
end the cycle of sorrow and hatred. We do not want
more blood or tears, so those resolutions must never
end up as mere pieces of paper. And we must foster
the serious negotiations that are under way by several
countries concerned outside this Chamber. We must
think tirelessly of what we should do to ensure that an
increased supply of humanitarian aid reaches the Gaza
Strip and that United Nations humanitarian staff can
work in a safe environment. In that regard, the Council
should provide its utmost support for the work of Senior
Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator for
Gaza Ms. Kaag, who just began her mission this month,
in line with resolution 2720 (2023).
Hamas must release all hostages immediately
and unconditionally. That is the starting point for
everything. The terrorist acts are unacceptable for
any reason.

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
22/59 24-01767
At the same time, let us further imagine the lives
and livelihoods of the people in Gaza. If one’s son or
daughter is killed or if one’s parent is killed, all that
remains within the heart of the bereaved is deep grief
and hatred that cannot easily heal. This humanitarian
catastrophe must be stopped. And all parties to the
conflict must comply with international law, including
international humanitarian law.
I hope that today’s debate will lead to action. We
have an undeniable responsibility for many fragile lives
and for history as well. We are witnessing the spillover
to the West Bank, Lebanon, the Red Sea, Yemen and
even more areas, which is seriously concerning. We are
at a crossroads at which it will be determined whether
those conflicts turn into a more large-scale regional
confrontation. We must stop that from happening.
In order to tackle all those serious challenges, a
two-State solution has even more importance than ever.
The key is for the people of both Israel and Palestine to
be able to lead a normal life without any fear for their
own safety and survival.
Japan will continuously work to build confidence
between the parties through its own initiatives.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate what I said here
45 days ago (see S/PV.9489). Japan, in good times and
bad times, runs alongside Palestine, Israel and all the
people living in the Middle East.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Minister for Foreign
Affairs Séjourné for coming to New York specifically
to preside over today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing
earlier. China welcomes the participation of the Foreign
Ministers of Palestine and many Arab and other
countries in today’s meeting.
More than 100 days have passed since the outbreak
of this new round of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The international community has continued to make
unremitting efforts to reach a ceasefire, stop the
hostilities, protect civilians, secure the release of
hostages and avert a humanitarian disaster. In that
regard, the Security Council has adopted resolutions
2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023). Regrettably, however, the
war in Gaza has continued unabated, with the number
of civilian casualties increasing every day, along with
the continued suffering of the Palestinian people and a
risk of further escalation of tensions in the region. There
can be no question that the tragedy in Gaza violates the
conscience of humankind and the fundamental tenets
of international law. There is no justification for it,
and it absolutely should not continue. Today’s Council
meeting should send a message of unity and clarity.
In fact, there has long been overwhelming consensus
in the international community about the importance
of an immediate ceasefire, and it is regrettable that
because of one country’s repeated use of the veto,
relevant resolutions of the Security Council could not
be adopted.
The history of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
spanning more than seven decades, has long pointed to
the fundamental path to peace. However, political will
and determination are absent. Today the international
community, especially the United Nations and the
Security Council, must demonstrate firm will and
take vigorous, effective action, with the greatest
sense of urgency, together with practical steps to
extinguish the flames of war and restore peace. An
immediate ceasefire must be the top priority. Rather
than providing greater security for any of the parties,
a protracted war will only cause more deaths and
make the prospects for peace even more distant. An
immediate ceasefire does not just mean restraint on
the part of one party. It is a requirement for all parties.
It is the basic prerequisite for saving lives, rescuing
hostages, expanding humanitarian assistance and
realizing peace. Israel should immediately reverse its
course and stop its indiscriminate military attacks and
its destruction of Gaza. All parties in the international
community should make unanimous diplomatic efforts
to promote an immediate ceasefire. While pushing for
a ceasefire in Gaza, every effort should be made to
prevent a spillover of the situation in Gaza to the Red
Sea and the wider region. We call on all the parties to
exercise restraint and avoid any action that could lead
to an escalation of tensions.
We must remove every obstacle to the expansion
of humanitarian assistance. As Secretary-General
Guterres said, people in Gaza are dying not just as a
result of the bombing but also from hunger and the
accelerated spread of infectious diseases, which are
claiming increasing numbers of lives, especially of
children. Resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023) must
be fully implemented, and Israel must cooperate fully
to that end. The obstacles to humanitarian assistance
through the Rafah and Kerem Shalom crossings
should be removed as soon as possible and direct
crossings from Israel to northern Gaza opened without
delay. Resolution 2712 (2023) calls for deconfliction

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 23/59
mechanisms to protect humanitarian organizations.
Concrete arrangements should be made for such
mechanisms as soon as possible to ensure that as a
matter of priority, hospitals and United Nations agencies
do not become targets of military operations. China
supports the work of Under-Secretary-General Kaag
and looks forward to her report to the Security Council
on the implementation of resolution 2720 (2023) and on
the obstacles encountered after communicating with all
parties. The Council should stand ready to take further
action to facilitate the safe, rapid and unhindered access
of adequate humanitarian assistance into Gaza.
The concept of a two-State solution must be
revitalized. It is the only viable path to peace for
Palestine and Israel. It is a solemn requirement under the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We are gravely
concerned about the Israeli leadership’s statements last
week rejecting the possibility of a two-State solution
and denying Palestine’s right to statehood. That is
unacceptable. Any discussion of post-war arrangements
for Gaza that does not involve the implementation of
a two-State solution is tantamount to building a house
on quicksand. The most important issue right now is
to stop any further erosion of the foundation of a two-
State solution, which first and foremost demands an end
to Israel’s forced transfer of the Palestinian population
in Gaza, to the building of settlements in the West Bank
and to searches, arrests and attacks on Palestinians.
China calls for intensifying diplomatic efforts
to convene an international conference and launch
meaningful multilateral processes as soon as possible,
with a view to reviving the political prospects for a two-
State solution. Independent Palestinian statehood must
be an irreversible process, and we support Palestine’s
full membership in the United Nations as soon as
possible as a first step in that process. In the current
circumstances, the Security Council must send a clear
and unequivocal message reaffirming the urgency
of a two-State solution as the sole feasible road to a
settlement. In November of last year, China submitted
a draft presidential statement on a two-State solution
to the Security Council, while the draft presidential
statement proposed by Russia last week also included
important elements related to such a solution. It is
regrettable that those draft statements were not adopted,
but that will not stop us from continuing to push the
Council to take the necessary action. We will continue
to work tirelessly to that end.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s very important
and timely meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
situation in Gaza and his update on the implementation
of resolution 2712 (2023). The information provided
painted a stark picture of the brutal reality that Palestinian
men, women and children are living through — a reality
that has progressively worsened since the events of
7 October 2023. Guyana unequivocally condemns the
violent, subhuman treatment to which the Palestinian
people continue to be subjected.
The desperate humanitarian situation in Gaza has
rightly attracted outrage and condemnation worldwide,
and Guyana underscores the collective responsibility
of the members of the Council to respond adequately
in order to protect and relieve the Palestinian people.
In that vein, we welcomed the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Ms. Sigrid Kaag as Senior Humanitarian
and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza, pursuant to
resolution 2720 (2023). We look forward to the speedy
establishment of a United Nations mechanism designed
to accelerate humanitarian relief consignments to Gaza
and urge all stakeholders to cooperate fully with the
Coordinator and the mechanism, once it is established.
While Guyana acknowledges that those are
important steps for the relief of the Palestinian people,
we emphasize that their impact will not be sustainable
without the establishment of a lasting ceasefire. Guyana
has taken note of the Secretary-General’s observation
that an effective aid operation requires “security staff
who can work in safety, logistical capacity and the
resumption of commercial activity”. Those conditions
do not exist currently and can never be met amid
constant and unrestrained bombings. Guyana therefore
urges intensified efforts towards the achievement of a
ceasefire and is prepared to work with fellow Council
members, and indeed with all, to that end.
The continued violations of international law,
including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, in the Gaza Strip
and in the occupied West Bank should never be met
with silence. Guyana deplores such violations by
all parties and underscores the obligation to adhere
to and respect international law. We condemn the
ongoing and indiscriminate attacks against hospitals,
refugee camps and United Nations facilities and call
on the Israel Defense Forces to cease the killing of

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
24/59 24-01767
innocent civilians. Those actions do not align with the
obligations of States Members of the United Nations
and are contrary to the purposes and principles of the
Organization, as outlined in the Charter. There must be
consequences for those illegal actions.
As is the case with war everywhere, this war in
Gaza is devastating in myriad ways. The delivery of
education has been jeopardized. The delivery of quality
health-care services has been seriously compromised,
and the health-care system brought to its knees. The
scarce economic opportunities that previously existed
for Palestinian people have now dwindled. Almost the
entire population of Gaza has been internally displaced.
The extent of the crisis in Gaza is exponential and places
the Palestinian people even farther behind in the global
quest for sustainable development. The anticipated
long-term impacts of the war confirm that.
The hostilities must end so that the Palestinian
people can rebuild their lives. On this latter note of
rebuilding their lives, we must seriously consider
what that would entail after this war ends. We must
seriously contemplate what must be done to change
the worsening circumstances that the people of Gaza,
and indeed the entire Palestinian population, have been
experiencing for more than seven decades. This is a
difficult question, the answer to which lies in altering
certain deep-rooted ideologies that justify policies of
discrimination against the Palestinian people. Frankly,
this discriminatory stance cannot be reconciled with
the Charter of the United Nations, which mandates
Member States to practice tolerance and live together
in peace with one another as good neighbours. Let me
also underscore Guyana’s rejection of any plans for
the forced resettlement of the population of Gaza to
foreign countries. Any such move would be contrary to
international humanitarian law and would violate the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
Guyana therefore urges the Council and the international
community to do everything in their power to prevent
such an occurrence.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the need for an
immediate ceasefire in Gaza. We also need meaningful
actions geared towards improving the standard of living
of the Palestinian people; facilitating the enjoyment
of their human rights, including their inalienable
right to self-determination; and most importantly,
achieving the two-State solution. Peace can never be
carved out through violence and conflict. Security can
never be achieved through insecurity and chaos. The
instruments of war must be set aside, and we must work
to implement a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question. We cannot miss the opportunity
that this moment provides to advance the two-State
solution. Guyana is ready to contribute constructively
to genuine efforts to that end.
Mr. De La Gasca (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
briefing. I reiterate Ecuador’s appreciation for his work
and that of all United Nations personnel, as well as our
condolences for the many United Nations staff members
who have lost their lives in recent months.
This open debate provides an opportunity for the
Council to hear the views of the States Members of the
United Nations. I will therefore be brief.
It has now been more than 100 days since the
heinous terrorist attacks perpetrated by Hamas on
7 October 2023. Ecuador take this opportunity to once
again condemn those attacks in the most emphatic and
unequivocal manner. We have not forgotten the horrors
of that day — the massacre of innocent civilians,
the indiscriminate firing of rockets and the sexual
violence — nor have we forgotten the hostages who
have yet to regain their freedom. That is why we insist
on demanding that all of them be released immediately
and unconditionally.
Likewise, after more than 100 days of war, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza is heartbreaking. We
have just heard the reports that attest to that. The
numbers of dead and wounded continue to grow. Hunger,
overcrowding and disease are gaining ground, while
humanity is losing ground. The full implementation of
resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023) is crucial to
alleviate the conditions faced by the civilian population
in Gaza. Facilitating the safe arrival of sufficient and
timely humanitarian aid to all those in need is essential.
To that end, a humanitarian ceasefire is imperative.
Preventing the suffering and death caused by wars
is the reason this Organization was established more
than 78 years ago. This must be the last war of this long
conflict. Our objective should be to create conditions
conducive to a peaceful, negotiated, definitive and just
solution for the parties, with the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders and
the relevant resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Every word or act that undermines the prospect of
the two-State solution serves to perpetuate the conflict
and does nothing to improve security. That should be

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 25/59
obvious to everyone, after so many years of violence
and death. For that reason, I wish to conclude by calling
upon all actors to exercise restraint, avoid exacerbating
tensions and prevent further expansion of the violence
to other areas. It is time to focus on achieving, once and
for all, the much-desired peace.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank the Secretary-
General for his valued insights.
More than 100 days have passed since Hamas
launched its brutal and deadly attack on innocent
civilians in Israel, during which hundreds were taken
hostage. Many Israelis are still living the nightmare
of knowing that their loved ones continue to suffer
in captivity. It has also been more than 100 days of
intolerable and perilous conditions for millions of
civilians in Gaza, who continue to live under a relentless
siege. More than 24,000 Palestinians have been killed,
and more than 60,000 have been wounded during
Israel’s military campaign, two thirds of them women
and children. An entire generation of Palestinian
children will be physically and psychologically marred
by this war.
Malta has consistently condemned the Hamas
terrorist attacks of 7 October 2023 and the continued
barrage of rockets fired at Israeli population centres.
We are also gravely concerned by reports of sexual
violence committed on 7 October and call for them to
be thoroughly investigated. We repeat that terror has
no justification. Malta will continue to call for the
immediate and unconditional release of all remaining
hostages held by Hamas.
However, the collective punishment of the entire
population of Gaza equally has no justification.
Israel’s actions should be in strict accordance with
its obligations under international humanitarian law
and its foundational principles, including distinction,
proportionality and precaution. All the parties are obliged
to ensure that civilians and civilian infrastructure are
protected. Yet nowhere and no one in Gaza is safe — no
United Nations facilities, no hospitals, no schools, and
no places of worship. Whether they are under a white
flag or a blue one, civilians, doctors and journalists are
facing the horror of this war without the protections
that they are guaranteed under international law.
Recent reports of intensified bombing in southern
Gaza, including around hospitals where thousands
are seeking refuge, are deeply disturbing. The people
are living with a daunting spectre of human-made
starvation, coupled with looming threats of disease,
malnutrition and other health crises. Urgent action is
needed to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid
both into and within Gaza. Additional crossing points
must be opened. Arbitrary bureaucratic impediments
hindering effective humanitarian operations must
cease. Furthermore, respect for the inviolability of
United Nations premises, medical staff, facilities
and humanitarian notification and deconfliction is
essential. Too many United Nations staff members and
their implementing partners have already been killed
or continue to work in treacherous conditions. We
applaud their heroism. The immediate implementation
of resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023) is crucial to
addressing those concerns.
Malta remains convinced that only a humanitarian
ceasefire will ensure that a sufficient and effective
humanitarian response operation can be properly
executed. It would also enable the establishment of
conditions that are conducive to a return to dialogue and
eventually to peace. Palestinians and Israelis equally
deserve to live in peace, dignity and security. That is
all the more urgent since the conflict is also fostering
turmoil across the Middle East. We continue to witness
rapidly deteriorating situations in the West Bank. We are
concerned about recent reports highlighting an increase
in intensified armed exchanges, the destruction of basic
infrastructure, the imposition of widespread restrictions
on movement and mass detentions extending across
the occupied West Bank, including in refugee camps.
The demolition of property owned by Palestinians, and
their displacement in East Jerusalem, including in the
Old City, should also be condemned. We further stress
that illegal settlements are in violation of international
law and that Israeli settler violence must be addressed
effectively and without impunity. Malta condemns the
forced displacement and transfer of Palestinians from
their land and homes.
In looking to the broader region, we are alarmed
at the provocative skirmishes along the Israeli-
Lebanese border and in the Red Sea. Malta condemns
all violations along the Blue Line, including attacks
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and
Houthi attacks on commercial shipping in the Red Sea.
We urgently call on all parties, including non-State
actors in those areas, to exercise restraint, de-escalate
tensions and uphold the norms of international law. It
is in times like these, when the threats of war loom
large, that we must work together towards a more stable
and peaceful future for the Middle East — a peace

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
26/59 24-01767
that is based on a two-State solution along the pre-
1967 borders, addressing the legitimate aspirations of
both sides, with Jerusalem as the future capital of two
States, living side by side in peace and security, in line
with all the relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
Mr. Safadi (Jordan): The clock is ticking. The
Israeli aggression in Gaza has lasted for far too long.
It has massacred far too many lives, with 109 days
of brutality, more than 25,000 innocent lives taken,
thousands of children buried under the rubble, mothers
and fathers helplessly watching as their sons and
daughters die from pain and malnutrition, and people
carrying the remains of their families in plastic bags.
Israel is making a mockery of international law, and
the Security Council has yet to demand a ceasefire. It
has yet to enforce its own resolution (resolution 2712
(2023)) demanding that food get to those who are
starving, medicine get to those who are sick or wounded
and anaesthesia get to children undergoing surgery to
treat injuries caused by indiscriminate Israeli shelling
of their homes, schools, hospitals, mosques, churches
and shelters. In what world should an uncle be forced to
operate on his teenage niece without anaesthesia? Dr.
Hani Beseiso did. On day 101 of the horror, besieged
in his home, he amputated his 16-year-old niece’s
foot, without anaesthesia, on his dining-room table. A
hospital was just five minutes away, but Israel’s war
prevented him from getting to it. According to Save the
Children, his niece A’hed is one of 10 children who lose
a limb every day in Gaza. Save the Children’s Director
for the occupied Palestinian territory has said,
“Even in a war zone, the sights and sounds of a young
child mutilated by bombs cannot be reconciled, let
alone understood, within the bounds of humanity.”
Stop the massacre. Every day that goes by without
ending the aggression means more innocent lives lost
to Israeli firepower, hunger and disease. The threat of
a devastating regional spillover is real. The West Bank
is boiling. Tensions elsewhere in the region are rising
dangerously. Secretary-General Guterres was right
when he said that Gaza has become a graveyard for
children. No place in Gaza is safe. Even the dead have
not escaped the inhumane onslaught. Israeli soldiers
literally dug them out of their graves in 16 cemeteries.
Those crimes are not the actions of rogue soldiers.
They are an expression of the extremist, racist agenda
that is propelling the war and that has systematically
dehumanized almost 5.5 million Palestinians under
Israeli occupation in Gaza, the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. That ideology of hate, embraced openly
by Israeli Ministers, is normalizing the mass murder
of Palestinians.
Israel has destroyed a whole community. It
has displaced more than two thirds of Gaza’s
population — 1.9 million people — who are now
suffering the indignity of overcrowded shelters and
are denied access to water, food and medicine. It has
starved civilians by deliberately impeding humanitarian
assistance. The Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification (IPC) assessment for Gaza released last
month confirmed that the entire population of Gaza is
facing acute levels of hunger. Of them, more than half
a million people are enduring the most extreme stage
of hunger — IPC level 5 — which means that half a
million Palestinians are being starved by Israel. The
number of people in that category in Gaza is four times
that of the rest of the world. No IPC analysis has ever
recorded such unprecedented levels of food insecurity
anywhere in the world in recent history. That brutality
cannot be allowed to continue. The Council must stop
it. Adopting a binding Security Council resolution to
force an end to the misery is the least that it can do.
Occupation, violence and war cannot continue
to haunt our region. Peace is the only guarantee of
security and safety for the Israelis, for the Palestinians
and for the whole region. Partial solutions will not
achieve that peace. All talk about approaches that will
deal with Gaza outside a comprehensive solution that
will end the occupation in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem and Gaza, will simply not work. There
cannot be more of the same. There cannot be more siege
and more oppression. Gazans cannot be told that they
have to once again endure living in the open prison that
Israel has made Gaza for decades.
The only path to peace is the establishment of
an independent, sovereign Palestinian State — with
occupied Jerusalem as its capital, along the 4 June 1967
borders — that will live side by side with a secure and
accepted Israel. All members support the two-State
solution, but the Israeli Government is undermining it.
Israel is openly defying all members. The Israeli Prime
Minister has vowed to never allow the Palestinian
people to realize their right to freedom and statehood.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 27/59
That means that he will continue to oppress the
Palestinian people. His policies and actions are making
it impossible for peace to be achieved. That defiance
cannot continue without consequences. Israel must be
held accountable for its actions, for its war crimes and
for preventing the achievement of peace. The future
of the region cannot be taken hostage by the political
ambitions and the radical agendas of Israeli extremists
who describe the Palestinians as human animals,
unworthy of life, and who enable settler terrorism
against the Palestinian people.
We are facing a decisive moment of truth. The
whole international community has an urgent choice to
make: allow the Israeli Government to doom the region
to more conflict or recognize the Palestinian State and
put our region on an irreversible path to peace. There is
no shortage of ideas for the plan that will bring about
that peace. However, there is a shortage of will — the
will of the Israeli Government to allow Palestinians
their inalienable rights and the will of the international
community to pay more than lip service to the two-
State solution.
The clock is ticking. The stakes are too high. What
is needed is a transformational move for peace. Make
that move. It is a move that must begin with stopping
this inhumane aggression. And it must conclude, soon
enough, with ending the occupation — the root cause
of all evil. Members must impose peace, for if they do
not, the Israeli Government will continue to impose
more war, impose more death and impose more hatred
on our region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Türkiye.
Mr. Fidan (Türkiye): We met in this Chamber
almost two months ago (see S/PV.9489). We warned
about the risks of Israeli attacks to regional and global
peace and security. One hundred and nine days into the
conflict, it is a shame that the international community
is still unable to stop the bloodshed in Gaza and the
West Bank.
Gaza used to be an open prison. Now it is a
battleground, where the Israeli Prime Minister runs
military operations to kill civilians in order to extend his
political life. The argument that the current war is about
providing security for Israel is far from convincing, yet
the proponents of that argument never talk about the
security of Palestinians nor the Palestinians’ right to
self-defence. The situation in Gaza and the West Bank
clearly demonstrates who needs security and the right
to self-defence most.
Israel commits serious war crimes. Those
responsible must be held accountable to restore faith
in international law and the rules-based order. We are
seriously concerned about the reports that Israel’s war
crimes in Gaza may amount to genocide. We welcome
the application before the International Court of Justice
concerning Israel’s violations of its obligations under
the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. It is a timely attempt to
protect the Palestinian people against further harm.
We also underline the need to avoid the geographical
escalation of the conflict. Türkiye consistently warned
about the risk of spillover. Today that risk has become
reality. Recent incidents in the Red Sea, Yemen,
Lebanon, Iraq, Syria, Iran and Pakistan are very
alarming. This escalation has the potential to turn
into a geostrategic vortex from which no one could
easily escape. I urge Israel and its supporters to seek
a diplomatic solution while we can still achieve it. The
ongoing war in Gaza and beyond cannot lead to peace
or submission. We have a historical responsibility to
stop this war. The Security Council, time and again,
has failed in maintaining international peace and
security. An immediate and permanent ceasefire, the
release of all captives by both sides and a continuous
flow of humanitarian assistance to Gaza are musts on
the road to peace.
To that end, we need Israel to comply with all the
requirements of peace and security. We need a unified
Palestinian leadership to achieve the national quest
for the dignity, independence and sovereignty of that
resilient nation. We all know by now that temporary
measures will not work. The scenarios for the day after
should not be about who will govern Gaza — the future
of Gaza is up to the Palestinians and the Palestinians
only. The only day-after question that needs our
attention is: how will we be able to safeguard a just and
lasting peace based on the two-State solution based on
the 1967 borders? The focus should be on the creation
of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. To that end, I would
like to reiterate our call for the establishment of a
guarantorship mechanism that monitors and ensures
peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Most of the members of the international community
agree on the urgency of a ceasefire, humanitarian
assistance and the two-State solution. But there is no

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
28/59 24-01767
effective mechanism for getting Israel to implement
that. The continuation of the current situation in Gaza
will further undermine the very fundamental principles
and moral values of the international system. Therefore,
we should act now to stop the erosion of those values,
which we will need for the future of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Amir-Abdollahian (Islamic Republic of
Iran): I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
timely meeting.
We have all gathered today in the Security Council
in a situation in which the occupying and apartheid
regime of Israel is not observing any red line in the
genocide against Palestinians in Gaza and the West
Bank. The United States, as the practical supporter
of the Israeli regime in its crimes, has prevented this
body from effectively fulfilling its inherent duties in
stopping the overt genocide of a nation and establishing
a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip.
On the one hand, the United States repeatedly
expresses its grave concern about the spillover of
tensions in the region, and yet it continues to give its
full support to the Israeli regime’s war machine and is
even violating the sovereignty of Yemen and expanding
the scope of the conflict. The United States must bear
the responsibility for the consequences of its actions.
Instead of calling on others to exercise restraint, it must
compel the Israeli regime to stop the war and extract
itself from the trap that the Israeli regime has set in
order to drag the United States into direct conflict.
We believe that the future of Palestine belongs to
all Palestinians. I stress that the killing of innocent
civilians, especially women and children, must stop
immediately. War is not the solution. Security cannot be
achieved by resorting to the use of force and committing
the crime of genocide in Gaza. The killing of civilians
in Gaza and the West Bank cannot continue until the so-
called total destruction of Hamas is achieved, because
that time will never come and because the Palestinian
nation’s will of steel has never once weakened in the
past 80 years. The Security Council must therefore
fulfil its legal responsibility under the Charter by
ending its prolonged inaction and adopting a decisive
resolution on the matter.
I want to emphasize that it is essential to completely
lift the inhumane blockade of Gaza and ensure
unrestricted delivery of humanitarian aid to all areas
in both north and south. I also want to underscore how
urgent it is to facilitate the return of the people of Gaza
to their own areas, to resettle the displaced and homeless
and to enable help from the international community for
rebuilding infrastructure. In that context, we support
South Africa’s recent action to bring a case at the
International Court of Justice. Various political ideas
for the future of Palestine are being discussed today.
Whatever ideas are under consideration, the leaders of
Palestinian groups and the Palestinian people should
have the right to choose their own fate.
The United States and the United Kingdom have
made a strategic mistake with their military attacks on
Yemen, which risk further expanding the scope of the
war in the region. While we all believe that maritime
safety and security are vital for global trade and
energy security, security is an interconnected concept.
The course of developments shows that stopping the
genocide in Gaza is the main key to restoring security
in the region.
Netanyahu seeks his own political life in war, and
the survival of the Israeli regime relies on regional
crises and a potential spillover of the conflict. The
Islamic Republic of Iran strongly supports restoring
security in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants
of Lebanon.
Mr. Bouhabib (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Despite
the difficult circumstances, I am pleased that we are
meeting today in this international forum to discuss
and exchange views about the situation in the Middle
East, thanks to the invitation of France, which along
with other friendly countries is constantly striving to
promote security and stability in the region.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
Lebanon’s deep appreciation for the role and sacrifices of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
My country appreciates its work and contribution to
establishing security and stability in southern Lebanon.
The problems currently facing the region reaffirm the
important and constructive role of UNIFIL, and of the
United Nations as a safe haven for small States such as
Lebanon, in protecting our sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
We are meeting today more than 75 years after
the beginning of the biggest crisis in the Middle

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 29/59
East — the establishment of Israel on the land of
Palestine and the displacement of more than half of the
Palestinian population to neighbouring countries. We
have continued to seek out temporary solutions from
time to time whenever the conflict has intensified,
most recently in response to the events that the region
has been witnessing since 7 October of last year. From
generation to generation, and for many decades, our
region has enjoyed neither peace nor security. The
conflict has created a heavy legacy of hatred, bitterness
and increasing violence that has been passed down
from one generation to the next.
What can we ask ourselves in the light of the
current explosive situation in the Middle East? Have we
learned anything from the lessons of the past? Is it not
time to admit that we cannot cancel one another out?
When will we start working on a sustainable solution
to this conflict? Will we leave it to future generations?
The continued wars, grudges and woes have shown for
at least the past 75 years that we must find a definitive
solution to the Palestinian question, because it is the key
to peace and the gateway to security in the Middle East.
From this Chamber, I call on the wise and
rational people of the world to put pressure on Israel
to end its occupation of Palestinian, Lebanese and
Syrian territories so that we can live together and
recognize one another, in accordance with the
resolutions of international legitimacy and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which emerged from the summit of
Arab leaders in Beirut in 2002. The Peace Initiative
proposed recognizing Israel in exchange for ending
the occupation and implementing a two-State solution
based on the right of the Palestinian people to establish
an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
There can be no sustainable peace without justice for the
Palestinians. Half-measures and temporary settlements
breed further wars and destruction.
We are meeting here today as Israel continues to
threaten to keep waging its grotesque war, without any
clear political horizon or vision for sustainable peace.
It is turning Gaza into ashes in order to eliminate
Hamas, but if that were achieved it would only breed
more extremist groups, ever more determined to erase
Israel from existence. Is the killing of more than 25,000
Palestinians in Gaza, most of them women, children
and elderly persons, not enough? That is more than
1 per cent of Gaza’s population, which is equivalent to
3.5 million American citizens or 4.5 million Europeans.
How will giving Israel carte blanche to blindly kill
people reflect on the image of the West in our world, as
the West continues to call for respect for human rights?
In the eyes of many peoples around the world, the West
has become the biggest loser in its defence of human
rights after it turned a blind eye to the mass killing of
women, children and elderly persons in Gaza.
We are following with grave concern the escalation
in the Red Sea and the threats posed to freedom of
navigation, the global economy and regional peace
and security. We are also following with concern the
situations in Iraq, Syria and specifically south Lebanon.
We dread any miscalculation that would drag the entire
region back into the Stone Age, while high-level Israeli
officials continue to threaten Lebanon. We are tirelessly
trying to prevent that war, and we urge all stakeholders
not to fall into Israel’s trap, which seeks to expand it. In
our view, such a war would be unprecedented in terms
of geographic expansion, multiple fronts and cross-
border involvement. We fear that the consequences
of such a war will not spare any place in the Middle
East. Such a war would not be a walk in the park for the
Israelis, as some war supporters believe for their own
political reasons.
As much as we fear witnessing the domino effect
of that conflict in the Middle East and especially
in Lebanon, we also see a historic opportunity for
sustainable calm along the southern Lebanese border.
Lebanon does not want war. We have never sought war,
and we will never seek it, because we have endured a 15-
year war and learned from its tragedies and scourges.
Israel’s wars and invasions led to destruction and the
death and injury of thousands of people. We therefore
today choose peace and stability, as it is the shortest
and best way towards prosperity.
Resolution 1701 (2006) had ensured relative
stability since the end of the war in July that year. Until
7 October 2023, no military operations were carried out
to threaten regional peace and security along Israel’s
withdrawal line from southern Lebanon in 2000, known
as the Blue Line. However, the war in Gaza shook the
relative stability in southern Lebanon and led to the
displacement of tens of thousands of Lebanese people
from southern towns to safe northern regions.
Our vision to achieve sustainable security
and stability in southern Lebanon is based on the
comprehensive and full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) as part of a comprehensive solution
with clear international guarantees, thus promoting

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
30/59 24-01767
comprehensive and sustainable security and stability.
The following should be observed.
First, the recognition of the international southern
border delineated in 1923 between Lebanon and
Palestine, which was recognized in the truce signed
between Lebanon and Israel in Rhodes, Greece, in
1949 under the auspices of the United Nations, and
the full and explicit commitment by both countries to
those borders. That requires an agreement on all the
remaining 13 disputed border points, following the
initial agreement on 7 points, under the supervision
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). That will lead to Israel’s withdrawal to its
internationally recognized borders, starting from point
B1 in Ras Al Naqoura, which is within the Lebanese
border, towards the outskirts of the town of Al-Mari,
which is in part an urban expansion of the town of
Al-Ghajar. Israel should also fully withdraw its forces
from Sheba’a Farms and the Kafr Shuba hills.
Secondly, Israel’s air, land and sea violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and internationally recognized
borders must end once and for all. There have been
nearly 30,000 such violations since 2006. Israel must
not use Lebanese airspace to target Syrian territories.
Thirdly, the United Nations and friendly countries
can support the Lebanese Government in extending its
authority over all Lebanese territories by strengthening
the Lebanese Armed Forces, by promoting the
Lebanese army’s deployment south of the Litani River,
and by providing all necessary equipment to the army
in cooperation with UNIFIL so that there can be
no weapon that has not been approved by Lebanon’s
Government and no authority beyond that of the
Lebanese Government.
Fourthly, it is necessary to facilitate the safe and
dignified return from border areas of persons who were
displaced after 7 October.
Fifthly, the war on Gaza must end so as to facilitate
the implementation of that vision. A mechanism must
be swiftly established to find a long-term solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
In conclusion, let us give peace a true chance before
it is too late. We have had enough of wars, conflicts,
killing and destruction. Let us stop working on
piecemeal solutions that have led only to the tragedies
we are living today. What happened on 7 October did
not happen in a vacuum. Those tragedies will only
happen again, but they will be even more violent and
terrible if we do not reach a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution whereby Israel implements all of the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Despite the ongoing painful events in the Middle
East, we have a historic opportunity today to establish
peace, security and prosperity. Let us seize it, since
such a historic opportunity may not come again in the
foreseen future. If we fail to do so, what happened on
7 October and prior to that date will occur again, but
will be worse, unless Israel accepts that the Palestinian
people will not vanish, disappear or even drown in the
sea. Their State will inevitably be established.
Let us save time and suffering for both sides and
pave the way towards a better future for the peoples
of our region. Let us rid the entire world from the
consequences of that conflict for generations to come.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Mr. Eide (Norway): I thank France for convening
us today at this crucially important moment for the
Middle East.
My thoughts are with the people of Gaza, who are
not only fleeing bombardments, fighting and military
confrontations, but who are also suffering from
increasing malnutrition, hunger and lack of medical
facilities and clean water. It is a deep humanitarian
crisis — one of the most dramatic in recent times, as
we heard from the Secretary-General and all the United
Nations agencies involved in the process. My thoughts
are with them.
My thoughts are also with the people of Israel,
who suffered the horrible, heinous attack by Hamas
on 7 October 2023, which included the use of sexual
and other types of violence. My thoughts are with those
being held hostage and their relatives, and I call for the
hostages’ immediate release.
My thoughts are also with the people of the West
Bank, who are experiencing increasing violence,
including settler violence and greater danger to their
lives. Nothing would be more tragic in our pursuit
of a peaceful path than to also see a collapse in the
West Bank. Last, but not least, my thoughts are with
all the United Nations workers and all of the people
in the humanitarian community who are struggling
to continue providing services, a shocking number of
whom have lost their lives.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 31/59
International humanitarian law has to be respected.
Violations are unacceptable. If we start accepting
violations of clear rules of humanitarian law, the rules
will lose their meaning and the rules will be harder to
uphold in future conflicts. And those rules have to be
upheld equally across similar situations.
Norway was among the first Western countries to
call for a sustained, enduring humanitarian ceasefire.
We continue to do so, and I am happy to see that more
countries are coming along. We call for the radical
stepping up of humanitarian efforts, not only with
regard to volume. I echo the Secretary-General in
pointing out that we cannot simply count trucks, but
must also look at the content, the efficiency of delivery
and access to that aid throughout the whole territory of
Gaza, as well as better coordination.
As many today have done, Norway welcomes
the appointment of Sigrid Kaag in her new, crucially
important and really difficult role. These are
imperatives, and we must get them done. They are a
prerequisite for any further action. But I also agree
with all those who say that these are not solutions
in themselves — they are prerequisites; they are
necessary; they are imperatives, but the solution must
be political. The solution requires that we return to
the political track, which Norway has been trying to
support for more than three decades after the Oslo
process. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
we need a political track towards Palestinian statehood.
Norway recognizes the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to have their own State, not only in
theory, but also in practice. We believe that the quest for
a Palestinian State is good for the Palestinian people,
but also for the people of Israel, because we believe
that it is the only route in which both communities and
societies can live in peace with themselves and each
other. We underline, as we have always done, that Israel
has the right to necessary security guarantees, just as
the Palestinian people do.
There must be a united Palestinian governance of
the old territory of Gaza and of the West Bank under
the Palestinian Authority. In order to get there, we
also have to make sure that we strengthen and help
further develop the Palestinian Authority. Norway has
made itself available to see if we can be helpful when
it comes to the transfer of money to the Palestinian
Authority — because before it can be strengthened,
it must be supported in order to survive this terribly
difficult situation. That is important for us. Alongside
efforts to coordinate with others on the humanitarian
track, we need legitimate, credible institutions to run the
entire Palestinian territory in future. I want to commend
the good work carried out by several ministers, many of
whom are in this Chamber, from Arab countries and
other Organization of Islamic Cooperation countries in
trying to develop a comprehensive plan, because I think
it is very important that we think about the immediate
future, the near future and the longer future.
We cannot skip any of those steps because we need
to have a credible vision and horizon towards Palestinian
Statehood. Norway believes that paving a path to
Palestinian Statehood should and must be connected
to the idea of a broader regional peace and a broader
regional settlement, with the necessary and legitimate
security guarantees for both Israel and Palestine.
The founding fathers of the United Nations set up
the Security Council to deal with exactly these kinds of
issues and challenges. I strongly call on all the members
of the Council to act and to take that responsibility
seriously in the midst of this deep crisis, where we see
immense suffering in Gaza, terror attacks on Israel,
the rising tide of violence in the Middle East and the
risk of spreading to the Red Sea, to Lebanon and to the
entire region.
This is also an opportunity for the international
community to come together and stop the immediate
fighting, deal with the legitimate security concerns of
all sides, help build a Palestinian State and bring us all
to a two-State solution, which would solve many of the
challenges of Israel, Palestine and the region.
I therefore call on the members to take on the
responsibility that was entrusted in them and the
countries we voted for when we elected the members of
the Security Council. This is truly an opportunity not
to be missed.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I am here today, for
the third time in three months, to join the Council’s
debate on Palestine in order to reaffirm Indonesia’s
unwavering commitment to stand with Palestine, to
declare that Indonesia will not rest until we see justice
and dignity restored for the Palestinian people. I am
also here to remind Council members that they have
a great mandate to maintain international peace and
security and to not tolerate wars, especially genocide.

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
32/59 24-01767
The Charter of the United Nations is clear: Security
Council resolutions are binding and must be enforced.
My question today is — how many resolutions have
been adopted on Palestine? How many are being
enforced? Where must Palestine go when, for decades,
the Council fails to act on its own resolutions while
Israel kills Palestinians with impunity?
I once again urge Council members to stop the
everyday horrors faced by the Palestinians in Gaza and
the West Bank. Is the death of more than 25,000 people,
with increasing numbers dying from hunger and the
freezing cold, including babies and children, too little
for us to act? We all have the responsibility to uphold
international humanitarian law, without exception, in
the face of the situation in Gaza.
On 18 January Prime Minister Netanyahu openly
declared that he would not allow a Palestinian State to
exist. Indonesia strongly rejects that statement, which
is unacceptable and confirms Israel’s ultimate goal to
wipe Palestine from the world map. Will the Council
remain silent in the face of such an intention? The
threat of a full-blown war in the Middle East is a real
and present danger.
In that context, I emphasize several points.
First, we demand an immediate and permanent
ceasefire, which will be a game changer for everything.
Most importantly, it will provide space to address the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and to begin work
on post-conflict reconstruction and the process for a
two-State solution. At the same time, it is critical to
support the efforts of the Senior Humanitarian and
Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza to pave the way
for the delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance
to Gaza.
Secondly, Palestine must be granted immediate
and full membership to the United Nations. That is
essential to starting fair and balanced work on the two-
State solution and to stop Israel’s brutal aggression.
Thirdly, the flow of arms to Israel must stop.
Every weapon sent to Israel can be used to kill
innocent civilians.
Israel must be held accountable for its actions,
including the atrocities committed in Gaza. No nation
is above the law Next month, Indonesia will present
its oral statement before the International Court of
Justice and request an advisory opinion from the Court,
seized of the matter under the mandate of the General
Assembly. Indonesia will take all possible avenues to
support Palestine.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Federal Minister for European and
International Affairs of the Republic of Austria.
Mr. Schallenberg (Austria): In a region that has
seen more than its fair share of suffering, the last 109
days have brought a new dimension of devastation for
Israelis traumatized by the slaughter, torture and sexual
violence of 7 October and who still fear for the more
than 130 innocent hostages held captive in Gaza, among
them an Austrian citizen. The same holds true for Jews
around the world who are facing rising antisemitism
and for the Palestinians in Gaza who have lost countless
loved ones and who lack shelter, food and medical aid.
All of this is heartbreaking. Hamas’s barbaric terror
attacks have brought Gaza and the whole region to the
edge of the abyss.
Let me be clear. No country on Earth would
tolerate such a murderous band of extremists in its
neighbourhood and we should all acknowledge that.
Israel has not only a right but a duty to defend its people.
At the same time, there can be no doubt that much more
needs to be done to protect civilians in Gaza. More
humanitarian aid must reach those in need. In the end,
that will add to Israel’s security, not detract from it. As
a country with a special historic responsibility, Israel’s
security is our guiding principle. Hamas is a security
threat to Israelis and Palestinians alike, just as Iran’s
proxies in Lebanon, Yemen and Iraq are. A resolute and
successful fight against terrorism is essential to Israel’s
security. It is as essential as not sowing the seeds for the
next generation of terror. But I must also make it clear
that settlements, settler violence, provocations at the
holy sites and talk of forced displacement undermine
security as well, and we categorically reject that.
They say that the Middle East is a cruel place for
optimists. And yet I still believe that peace is possible.
Normalization delivers a political and economic
dividend for everyone. Arab partners should not allow
themselves to be taken hostage by Hamas. Israel’s long-
term security will be best guaranteed by two States
living side by side in peace. The Palestinian Authority
needs to finally live up to the rightful expectations of its
own people. And we as the international community also
need to do more by bringing home all hostages, easing
the humanitarian suffering in Gaza, jointly fighting
terrorism and laying the foundations for a life in peace
and dignity for all, Israelis and Palestinians alike.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 33/59
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
Mr. Hasan (Malaysia): First and foremost, Malaysia
would like to thank your delegation, Madam President,
for convening this debate, and the Secretary-General
for his briefing this afternoon.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Malaysia also congratulates and welcomes the new
members of the Council to our shared responsibility for
upholding peace and security across the globe.
Just last week, Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths said that Gaza is a stain on our collective
conscience, and that our inaction would be a permanent
black mark for humankind. Indeed, the Council’s
inability to call for a ceasefire is partly responsible
for what has now been more than 100 days of carnage
in Gaza — more than 100 days of children being
orphaned, of mothers and fathers becoming parents
without children, of streets becoming graveyards and of
Palestinians being called “the children of darkness” by
the regime that is raining down bombs on their homes
and hospitals.
More than 23,000 Palestinians have been killed
since this crisis began. On average, more than 250
Palestinians are being killed every day, which is
more than 10 murders every hour. According to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as many as 1.9 million people,
or nearly 85 per cent of Gaza’s population, have been
forcibly displaced. Malaysia is appalled that Israel has
been allowed to carry out what can only be described as
indiscriminate bombing. Homes, shelters, evacuation
routes and even medical centres have been bombed.
Those who have not been killed by bombs or bullets
face the prospect of disease and starvation. They are
being denied food, water, medicine, electricity, fuel and
other basic needs. Gaza is on the brink of a human-made
famine, and its population is being starved as a method
of warfare. It is a fact that those are war crimes. Israel
has made sure that no one is safe, not even children.
The crisis has introduced a most unwelcome new term
into the English language. The acronym WCNSF stands
for “wounded child, no surviving family”. That is used
to describe what is now an everyday sight in Gaza.
Malaysia demands an immediate ceasefire and
condemns the forced displacement of Palestinians. The
right to live in peace and security is fundamental, and
we urge all parties to respect that basic human right. We
call for United Nations agencies and aid organizations
to be given access so that they can provide essential aid
without delay and hindrance.
Malaysia demands accountability for Israel’s clear
violations of international law. We welcome and support
the decision by South Africa to institute proceedings
against Israel before the International Court of Justice.
The lack of accountability for Israel’s war crimes
undermines the legitimacy of international law and the
efforts to end the illegal occupation of Palestine. With
regard to upholding international law and the rights of
the oppressed, on 23 July 2023 Malaysia, along with 56
other countries, submitted a written statement for the
Court’s advisory opinion on the legal consequences of
Israel’s ongoing violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Malaysia will now also participate in the public
hearing to be held on 19 February. We condemn Israel’s
apartheid practices and persecution of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories. As a
Member State of the United Nations, Israel must respect
and implement the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. The Council cannot allow Israel to behave as
an exception to the rule.
The international community must make scaling
up all necessary amenities for the Palestinian people
a priority. Access to basic services is a human right
that should not be compromised. Israel’s collective
punishment of the entire population of Gaza is illegal,
immoral and must cease immediately. Our position is
clear. There should be no reduction of the Palestinian
territory. Any attempt to grab Palestinians’ land
violates international law and further undermines the
prospects for peaceful coexistence. Malaysia calls for
the full and swift implementation of resolutions 2712
(2023) and 2720 (2023). In October and December of last
year, we joined an overwhelming majority of Member
States in voting for two General Assembly resolutions
(resolutions ES-10/21 and ES-10/22) demanding the
protection of civilians and the upholding of legal, as
well as humanitarian, obligations in relation to Gaza.
The majority has spoken and their demands should not
be ignored.
Malaysia welcomes the appointment of Ms. Sigrid
Kaag as Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction
Coordinator for Gaza, pursuant to resolution 2720
(2023). We hope that Ms. Kaag, who has vast
experience, especially in Lebanon, will be given the

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
34/59 24-01767
support she needs to effectively discharge her mandate
and alleviate the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza. We
encourage collaboration among the parties concerned
for a just and lasting solution to the bloodshed.
We are witnessing a great historical irony in Gaza.
The State of Israel was born from the horrors of the
Second World War. And yet, for the past 75 years, it
has been inflicting that same deliberate destruction
on the Palestinian people and is now pursuing it to its
premeditated end. That illegal and immoral pogrom of
total annihilation should lead to a single decision by
members of the Council. It is time to recognize what
Israel has been doing as genocide. And it is time to
accept the State of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.
No nation and no people should be made to suffer
the prolonged indignity of being mere observers of
their own slow, painful and humiliating demise. In
the United Nations of all places Palestine should be
given the right to face its occupiers, not as second-class
citizens but as equals with a legitimate voice and an
equal vote. We have failed them for far too long. We
must stop this charade.
The Palestinians deserve nothing less than a free
and independent Palestine, on the basis of a two-
State solution, based on pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Malaysia will continue to do all
that is within its means and within its rights to bring an
end to the injustice and illegality. The State of Palestine
must be admitted as the 194th Member of the United
Nations. We urge the Council to act now. The Council
must take united and decisive action to stop the war,
save civilian lives, end collective punishment and stop
the killing now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. El-Khereiji (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Republic of
France for its concrete efforts during its presidency of
the Security Council and for its initiative to convene
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East. I
also commend the Secretary-General and the Senior
Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator for
Gaza for their efforts and constructive role.
The Security Council is meeting once again as the
difficult circumstances and the bitter reality worsen in
Gaza with the escalation of tension in the region due
to the continued Israeli aggression. Victims are falling
owing to the indiscriminate and widespread bombing
of the Israeli war machine, which has taken the entire
Gaza Strip — its neighbourhoods, homes, hospitals,
places of worship and United Nations buildings — as
legitimate targets. Approximately 30,000 people have
been killed as a result of the escalation, and the death
toll is increasing by the day. How can this tragedy
continue without serious action being taken to end it
and without concrete steps being taken to stop the mass
killing and abuse of unarmed civilians in Gaza?
The effects of the brutal war have become clear. We
have a shared responsibility to contain its regional and
international effects. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
previously warned about the expansion of the conflict
and its impact on regional and international security
and stability. The military operations in the Red Sea
and in the Republic of Yemen are a cause for concern.
We stress the need to take the necessary measures to
contain the repercussions of the crisis, which affects
neighbouring countries and international peace
and security.
The priority now is to alleviate the human suffering
and put an end to the military operations in Palestine. No
measures to enhance regional security or deter threats
can replace addressing the root causes of the Palestinian
crisis and reaching a just and lasting solution.
In that regard, the Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must take immediate action to
bring about a ceasefire, establish peace, alleviate the
suffering and enable the Palestinian people to preserve
their dignity and enjoy their legitimate rights. How
can the Palestinian people hope for a better future, a
decent life and development under the yoke of the
occupation and under the continuous fire of the Israeli
war machine?
General Assembly resolution ES-10/22, which calls
for an immediate ceasefire, confirms the existence
of an international position in favour of ending the
aggression and saving civilians in Gaza.
We strongly reject linking the war to the pretext
of self-defence. We also reject the forced displacement
measures against the people of Gaza and the racist,
incendiary and irresponsible statements of the
occupation authorities. We condemn the unacceptable
disregard for the lives of the Palestinian people, as if
the protection of civilians were the exclusive right of
one people and not another. All of that fuels acts of

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 35/59
violence, hatred and extremism in the region and makes
it possible for the cycle of violence to be periodically
repeated without a willingness to engage positively in
the near future.
My country has always sought and will continue
to seek peace. We will spare no effort to bring peace,
security and development to the region. From that
standpoint, we have repeatedly called for the revival
of the Middle East peace process and commitment
to the two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders,
in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Security Council resolutions.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia categorically rejects
violations of international humanitarian law by any
party and under any pretext. We condemn the targeting
of civilians anywhere and call upon the Council to take
a firm position to oblige Israel to respect international
law and put an end to the suffering.
The continuation of military operations will lead
only to the bloodshed of more innocent people. The
lack of an agreement on a unified position regarding
a ceasefire and the delay in implementing adopted
resolutions threaten to further damage the credibility
of the Security Council. The escalatory attitude of
the Israeli occupying forces fuels the tensions and
threatens to undermine international efforts to promote
stability in the region and find peaceful solutions.
The continuation of the status quo will lead the region
from one conflict to another and undermine the
interests, security and stability of the entire region,
including Israel.
The peace to which we aspire will be achieved only
through the creation of a credible and irreversible path
towards the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, guaranteeing the rights and dignity of the
Palestinian people, paving the way towards coexistence,
common security, stability and development for all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I extend to you, Madam President, and
to your friendly country, the Republic of France, my
congratulations on your presidency of the Security
Council during the month of January and wish
you success in facilitating the work of the Council
to strengthen international law, in line with the
purposes, principles and values of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In the light of exceptional and catastrophic
developments, we meet again today at the United
Nations, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security. Nonetheless, it has
become clear that what we have witnessed in the Gaza
Strip — unspeakable crimes and human suffering that
has shocked our conscience — has been caused by the
Security Council’s failure to live up to its political, legal
and humanitarian responsibilities. That is the result of
practising double standards, as the Council has failed
to take a principled position in the face of the Israeli
aggression in the Gaza Strip.
The Security Council stood idly by while occupation
forces continued their gross violations of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as resolutions of international
legitimacy, including resolutions of the Council, which
was also unable to adopt a resolution demanding the
immediate cessation of the criminal Israeli acts. That is
a direct result of narrow geopolitical interests prevailing
over the importance and centrality of applying the law
to everyone, without exception.
The Gaza Strip has been subject to collective
punishment, indiscriminate bombing, the killing
of innocent civilians — whose number has now
exceeded 25,000, including children and women — the
destruction of infrastructure, the demolition of homes,
the targeting of journalists and relief workers, the killing
of more than 150 United Nations staff members and the
continued targeting of hospitals and places of worship.
All of that is inconsistent with international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which we all endorsed when the Organization
was established to defend the rights of humankind.
Today we have come to the Security Council
to defend our brotherly Palestinian people and
international law, as a whole. We have no choice but
to resort to international law and the United Nations
Charter to preserve our dignity and rights as individuals
and our security and stability, as Member States of
the Organization.
In this Chamber, the State of Kuwait reaffirms
its steadfast and historical position in support of
Palestinian rights and stresses that the main reason
for the conflict is an occupation, with no end in
sight. If we want sustainable peace and security, the
Palestinian question must be resolved, in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference and international
resolutions, in particular the relevant Security Council

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
36/59 24-01767
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, to
ensure that the brotherly Palestinian people can enjoy
all their legitimate political rights and their right to
self-determination and an independent, sovereign
Palestinian State is established, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its strong
condemnation and denunciation of the continued
blatant aggression against the Gaza Strip by the Israeli
occupation forces. That devastating war must end
immediately. Humanitarian and relief aid must reach
wounded Palestinians without any obstacle, to ensure
respect for international law and accountability for
crimes against humanity, which were committed and
continue to be committed against the defenceless
Palestinian people. In that context, my country welcomes
the step taken by the Republic of South Africa, which
filed a case with the International Court of Justice
against the Israeli occupation for committing the crime
of genocide against the brotherly Palestinian people.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait once again calls
on the Security Council to assume its responsibilities
and provide international protection for the Palestinian
people. We appeal to the international community to
support the resilient Palestinian people on their land.
We warn against any attempts to displace them and
exacerbate the issue of refugees, whose rights must be
maintained. The passage of time and waves of forced
displacement cannot deprive the brotherly Palestinian
people of their right to return to their homeland.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Martínez Belío (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
conflict and tensions in the Middle East are continuing
to worsen despite our efforts, and we must therefore
redouble those efforts. The international community
cannot resign itself to innocent Palestinian civilians
continuing to die, to the humanitarian situation in Gaza
continuing to deteriorate and to Israeli hostages and
displaced persons being unable to return home. Women
and children make up 70 per cent of those killed in Gaza.
Our priority is to achieve a ceasefire in Gaza
that enables the release of hostages, the provision
of humanitarian relief for the population and the
stabilization of the situation in Gaza and the West
Bank, as well as in southern Lebanon and northern
Israel. In resolutions 2720 (2023) and 2712 (2023), the
Council set out the parameters for our humanitarian
work, in which the United Nations will play a central
role. I would like to call upon all parties to cooperate
actively in that regard. I would also like to pay heartfelt
tribute to the extraordinary work being done by all
United Nations personnel in Gaza, some of whom have
even sacrificed their lives.
Spain tripled its humanitarian and cooperation
funds to address this crisis, providing €48 million in
2023. We will continue our development cooperation
with Palestine, while providing greater support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, humanitarian agencies
and the Palestinian Authority, which represents the
Palestinian people and is our partner for peace.
Since the outset, we have said that Israel has the right
to object to the cowardly terrorist attack of 7 October
2023, which we condemn without reserve. It must do so
with full respect for international humanitarian law and
international law. A distinction must be drawn between
terrorist targets and civilians. Hamas has shown that it
is no more than a terrorist group and that it cannot have
a governing role in Gaza, but innocent civilians cannot
pay for its crimes.
Experience has shown that the only true guarantee
of security for Israel is the re-establishment of the
Palestinian Authority in Gaza. At the same time, the
best way to revitalize the Palestinian Authority so that
it assumes that responsibility is to achieve a political
solution to the conflict. The Palestinian people have
the right to their own sovereign, viable State, with East
Jerusalem at its capital.
The international community must assume its
responsibility and provide the context within which to
achieve the two-State solution, without further delay. To
that end, Spain has proposed convening an international
conference as soon as possible, and 84 countries have
formally endorsed this idea at the highest level — the
members of the European Union, the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
To achieve this agenda for peace, we must prevent
the crisis from spreading in the region. In Lebanon, a
full implementation of all elements of resolution 1701
(2006) would provide a clear road map, and Spain has
been firmly committed to it since the outset. We call
upon all regional and international stakeholders to take
an active and constructive role to reduce tensions and
prevent further bloodshed.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 37/59
The international community must be consistent
throughout the process. The value of human life and
respect for international norms and principles must be
universal and be affirmed equally in all international
crises and in all circumstances. The developments that
we have experienced since 7 October cannot reoccur.
The region needs more than ever before to turn a new
page, based on the implementation of the resolutions
of the Security Council, the achievement of the two-
State solution and mutual recognition as a path to
comprehensive peace. Out of the urgency to bring an
end to the current crisis and to prevent a spillover, a
fresh mobilization, this time a definitive one for peace,
must emerge.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): We have
all heard today how the scale of suffering in Gaza
competes with some of the darkest periods in our
history. This moment can be an inflection point, or it
can be the point of no return.
We are seeing the conflict spill over in the Middle
East. The Houthis are holding maritime trade hostage
by their opportunistic attacks in the Red Sea. Militias
and other armed groups are sabre-rattling, risking
increased instability in our region. A little more than a
week ago, the world was engrossed in the proceedings
at the International Court of Justice in The Hague.
That such a case has been initiated and has generated
such international interest and support underlines the
gravity of the situation.
The United Arab Emirates would like to define
three steps to bring these crises in the Middle East to
an end.
First, as has been said, we need an immediate
humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza. The overwhelming
majority of the international community has called for
this repeatedly, and it is time that the minority view stop
obstructing it from happening. We cannot wait another
100 days. The intolerable effects of the ongoing Israeli
bombardment of Gaza have resulted in what the United
Nations has described as the worst humanitarian crisis
in the history of the Organization. More than 25,000
people have died so far in Gaza, in addition to the 1,000
Israelis who died in the 7 October attack. But today
Gaza is also being starved. One in four people are now
experiencing famine-like conditions. The humanitarian
imperative at this moment must be our top priority, in
addition to the ceasefire, so that life-saving aid can
enter at scale and hostages can be allowed out and safely
returned to their families. The United Arab Emirates
will not cease calling for such a humanitarian ceasefire.
Secondly, and even as we continue to push for
a ceasefire, shorter truces would enable urgent
humanitarian aid and services to reach those in need,
in parallel with the release of hostages. The truce at
the end of November enabled additional assistance and
humanitarian activities in Gaza, and we need more of
them to start tomorrow. Finding pathways to similar
agreements is essential. Resolutions 2712 (2023) and
2720 (2023) must be fully implemented. That includes
ensuring that the United Nations Senior Humanitarian
and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza is able to fulfil
her crucial mandate, including through the establishment
of a United Nations mechanism. Ms. Sigrid Kaag has
hit the ground running, and we urge the United Nations
and its Member States to give her their full support,
including for any recommendations that she makes to
the Council in her first report next week.
We also stress the need to end the so-called dual-use
restrictions that are seeing trucks carrying basic
medical supplies being turned away. Humanitarians
describe this as a cruel policy that inflicts enormous
suffering on the population in Gaza. We need to see the
Karam Abu-Salim/Kerem Shalom border crossing fully
opened to both humanitarian flow and commercial
trade. The opening and facilitation of new routes as well
as the reopening of the port of Ashdod, the removal of
restrictions on the movement of humanitarian workers
and full guarantees of safety for those accessing and
distributing aid must all be prioritized.
Thirdly, any resolution to this conflict must be
anchored in a two-State solution. The United Arab
Emirates will not support a return to the failed status quo.
Before all of this, a two-State solution was the endpoint
that we envisioned our diplomatic efforts would lead us
to. Today it must be our starting point. On both sides, the
future must be led by those who speak responsibly, who
understand that peace demands dignity and equality
for both peoples and who will begin negotiations
on that basis. There are those who resist a two-State
solution — even now — without a viable alternative. We
ask what they propose as a just and sustainable path to
peace in the absence of such a solution. What is needed
is a valid, defined, benchmarked and agreed-upon way
towards a two-State solution, and one that includes a
workable governance structure. It is the only way to

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
38/59 24-01767
end this conflict sustainably and prevent the cycle of
violence that has been inflicted on both Palestinians
and Israeli from forever being repeated. It is not only
a moral and political duty to end the war on Gaza but
also a strategic imperative if there is to be any hope of
a prosperous future for our region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): I have the honour
to read out a statement on behalf of Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
who was unable to participate in this important meeting
owing to an emergency.
“I would like to begin by expressing the
appreciation of the League of Arab States for
France’s initiative to elevate this meeting to the
ministerial level, and by thanking the Ministers
and deputies for their participation. I also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his strong
statement today, especially following the alarming
deterioration of the situation in our Arab region.
“That situation has been the result of undeterred
and unchecked Israeli arrogance and recklessness,
and of the Security Council’s inability — all the
warnings notwithstanding — to create a political
horizon for resolving the Palestinian question and
providing the defenceless Palestinian people with
the necessary protection from years and years of
blatant Israeli violations. They include Israel’s
violations of Security Council resolution 2334
(2016), concerning settlements. Those violations,
which have been confirmed and documented by
reports of the United Nations and human rights
organizations, led to the explosive situation that
erupted on 7 October and subsequently to Israel’s
fiercest and most violent illegal military operation
against defenceless Palestinian civilians. That
operation has now lasted more than 100 days,
with devastating humanitarian repercussions.
According to many estimates, it amounts to
apartheid and genocide.
“The humanitarian tragedy in Gaza, the West
Bank, Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories is worsening every day,
compounded by the use of the veto power by some
Council members in order to prevent the adoption
of resolutions calling for a ceasefire. It raises
deep concerns among the 153 countries, from
all groups and orientations, that have formally
affirmed in the General Assembly their demand
for an immediate ceasefire. Today those countries
are wondering if the rules of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights
law apply to Israel, the occupying Power, in the
same way that they apply to other States Members
of the Organization. They are wondering how long
it will take for Israel to be held accountable for its
flagrant violations against the Palestinian people.
Will the double standards practiced by the Council
and its sharp geopolitical polarization prevent the
application of international law to Israel in order to
protect narrow electoral interests, on the one hand,
and to enable some extremist leaders to escape
punishment, on the other?
“The depth and gravity of this crisis are
compounded by Israel’s relentless attempts to
exploit the weaknesses in the Council’s performance
and expand the scope of the conflict regionally
by bombing Syrian airports and attacking
Syrian territories; by carrying out attacks and
assassinations in southern Lebanon and relentlessly
trying to drag other parties in the region from
outside the Arab family into military conflict; and
to top all that off by accusing those who criticize its
illegal practices of being antisemitic. That has had a
damaging effect on all the main organs and figures
of the United Nations, including the Council, the
Secretary-General and senior officials.
“At this point, I would like to put on record
the Arab League’s great appreciation of the
humanitarian relief efforts of the United Nations
and its partners. We sympathize with the families of
the victims who have fallen doing their noble duty.
Despite the reported differences between the views
of major international leaders supporting Israel and
those of the extreme right-wing Israeli leadership
on Israel’s strategies and practices in its blatant
war on Gaza, the Palestinian people and other Arab
countries, we have not seen any concomitant change
in the Council’s official positions. Considering that
the Israeli escalation will expand the scope of the
military conflict in the region in a manner that
threatens to result in the outbreak of a new regional
war, the Council and the countries of the region will
face harsh choices, especially with the increasing
heavy losses on both sides and their catastrophic
humanitarian repercussions.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 39/59
“In that regard, the Council must realize that
the unlimited support that Israel enjoys from
key Powers in the Council will only continue to
succeed in creating a growing sense internationally
that it is inevitable that Israel should be subject
to international judicial accountability and those
involved in its extreme right-wing Government
to international criminal prosecution — as has
been demonstrated by the Arab, African, Islamic
and international support for the unprecedented
initiatives by the General Assembly and South
Africa and other countries to turn to the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Court in order to see Israel and its
officials prosecuted for those violations. The
civilized international community, which believes
in the international collective security system, is
eagerly awaiting international judicial bodies to
issue ad interim and permanent rulings and orders
to accomplish what the Council was unfortunately
unable to achieve under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
“Invoking Article 99 of the Charter, the
Secretary-General sent a letter to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/962) conveying a
realistic warning, endorsed by the League of Arab
States, about the seriousness of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in the Middle
East as a whole. Statements by the Secretary-General
to the Council in December 2023 and January 2024
have confirmed the bleak situation resulting from
Israel’s military escalation pursuing the delusional
goal that Israel can eradicate Palestinian resistance
and Hamas. Despite warnings at the regional and
international levels, namely, by the European
Union, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and other
organizations, the Council has failed to adopt a
resolution calling for a ceasefire, including even on
humanitarian grounds. It has been unable to ensure
practical guarantees to facilitate the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian aid to Palestine.
“At the meeting requested by Algeria on behalf
of the League of Arab States on Friday, 12 January
(see S/PV.9531), members of the Council were
unanimous in their categorical rejection of Israel’s
declared intentions to internally displace people of
Gaza or to forcibly transfer them to neighbouring
countries. Nevertheless, the Council has not taken
any practical measures to stop those plans. That is
why the League of Arab States is looking forward
to the Council adopting, as soon as possible, a
clear resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire
that includes specific executive measures to stop
the transfer of Palestinians, as part of the full
implementation of resolution 2720 (2023) on
mechanisms to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
aid. Such a resolution should include innovative
mechanisms to effectively ensure the protection of
the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights
from acts of aggression by the Israeli army and
hordes of settlers until they are able to establish
their own sovereign and independent State.
“In parallel, the Security Council must
confront all Israeli attempts to destroy the two-
State solution. Only recently, the Prime Minister
told the media last Friday that he was opposed to
the two-State solution and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State. The Council must
respond with practical steps by advocating for
the establishment of a clear political horizon to
launch direct negotiations between Israel and the
State of Palestine in order to pave the way towards
the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State. This should also include the convening of
a high-level international conference to that end.
Immediate action must be taken to ensure that the
State of Palestine becomes a full-fledged member
of the United Nations.
“In conclusion, the League of Arab States is
working tirelessly with the European Union and
peace-loving nations in the East and the West to
create the necessary political horizon to implement
the two-State solution and establish an independent
Palestinian State. However, achieving that goal
requires an immediate ceasefire. Furthermore,
it requires that Israel immediately refrain from
provoking Syria and Lebanon with its military
operations against the two countries. Israel should
stop expanding the conflict at the regional level.
It should cease its attempts to alter the geographic
and demographic status of Gaza or any other
part of the occupied Palestinian territories. Israel
must realize that establishing relations with Arab
countries and living in peace with them will
not be achieved solely based on the so-called
Abraham Accords. It will remain contingent on
reaching a comprehensive and just settlement of
the Palestinian question — the central question for

S/PV.9534 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/01/2024
40/59 24-01767
the entire Arab world — at the core of which lies
the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State along the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its
capital. Israel must recognize that the Arab Peace
Initiative, adopted at the Beirut summit in 2002,
remains a just foundation to reach such a settlement
if Israel truly wishes to achieve peace, security and
stability for all peoples of the Middle East, without
exception, including the Israeli people.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Group of Arab States.
At the outset, I congratulate you, Madam President,
on presiding over this important open debate. I also
thank the delegation of France for its efforts during
its country’s presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I sincerely congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council, namely Algeria, Guyana,
the Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone and Slovenia, on
beginning their term in the Council. The Arab Group
wishes them every success in their endeavours. I also
reaffirm the Group’s support for the delegation of
Algeria in defending shared Arab issues and building
on the productive and tireless work undertaken by the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates in the Council.
I would like to welcome all ministers to this meeting.
Their presence attests to the importance accorded to the
issue of Israel’s ongoing systemic aggression against
the brotherly Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip for
more than 100 days now. The number of victims of that
aggression has reached horrific proportions and is still
increasing, owing to the ongoing aggression against
the brotherly Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza
Strip, which is under siege. It has also led to the systemic
destruction of civilian infrastructure and facilities and
has exacerbated the suffering of Palestinian civilians,
who are facing disastrous humanitarian conditions
caused by the aggression. The aggression is also
threatening stability and security in the region, as
His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres
stressed in his briefing. I would like to take this
opportunity to once again express the appreciation of
the Arab Group for the Secretary-General and his noble
efforts and repeated calls for a humanitarian ceasefire.
The Arab Group reaffirms its call for an immediate
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. We stress the need for the
Security Council to shoulder its main responsibility,
namely the maintenance of international peace and
security, by ending Israel’s dangerous and ongoing
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Council must ensure that Israel complies with the
international community’s will, as set forth in General
Assembly resolution ES-10/22, adopted by the Assembly
at its resumed tenth emergency special session by of
153 Member States at a time when the Security Council
was unable to shoulder its responsibility by adopting a
ceasefire resolution. The international community and
the Security Council must protect civilians and accelerate
the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to
the Gaza Strip, in line with resolutions 2712 (2023)
and 2720 (2023), to respond to the dire humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip.
The Arab Group reaffirms that ending the
humanitarian suffering and disaster that has befallen
more than 2 million people in Gaza requires an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire. We also stress
the need to support the efforts of Ms. Sigrid Kaag,
Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator
for Gaza, in shouldering her responsibility. It is
important to enable her to carry out her mandate and
implement resolution 2720 (2023), including by
establishing a United Nations mechanism to facilitate
the entry and oversight of humanitarian and relief
assistance to the Gaza Strip. The Arab Group also calls
on the international community to provide further safe
and continuous humanitarian assistance to the brotherly
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip to meet their needs
and ease their severe suffering.
The Arab Group categorically rejects the collective
punishment policy adopted by the Israeli Government
against the people of the Gaza Strip and the other
occupied Palestinian territories. We reject any attempt
at the forced displacement of Palestinians from their
land. We reaffirm our strong condemnation of the
most recent extremist and racist statements made
by members of the Israeli Government pertaining
to the forced displacement of Palestinians outside
the Gaza Strip, its reoccupation and the building of
settlements there, which constitute an explicit and
blatant violation of international law and resolutions
of international legitimacy. We condemn Israel’s
ongoing illegal practices, including in the West Bank
and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, which only undermine the
peace process and exacerbate tension, escalation and
instability in the region.

23/01/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9534
24-01767 41/59
The international community should address the
crimes perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power,
in its war against the people in the Gaza Strip. It is
targeting civilians and destroying vital infrastructure,
places of worship, schools, universities and hospitals.
It is cutting off water and energy, starving the people
of Gaza and committing other blatant violations of
international humanitarian law. We also stress the right
of the Palestinian refugees and displaced people to
return to their home.
The Arab Group supports South Africa’s case at
the International Court of Justice against Israel for
genocide and the violation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
of 1948. We commend the principled position taken
by South Africa to defend the rights of the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian question as an important
step towards a ceasefire, accountability and justice. We
stress that we will continue to support that noble effort.
The number of victims of the Israeli aggression on
the Palestinian people has exceeded 25,000 martyrs,
mostly women and children. There are tens of thousands
of injured people and dead bodies under the rubble, let
alone more than 153 United Nations staff, including
from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and no fewer than
117 journalists. The Israeli aggression is destroying
civilian infrastructure and facilities in blatant violation
of international law and international humanitarian
law. An immediate, lasting and comprehensive
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip is the only way to save
the lives and alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people, along with protecting civilians and meeting
their humanitarian needs. That is the inherent right
of unarmed civilians ensured by international legal
instruments and principles of human rights. That is also
an ethical, legal and political duty that the international
community and the Security Council should shoulder.
Furthermore, the Arab Group condemns the
repeated Israeli acts of aggression on the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Lebanese Republic.
It is important to safeguard safety and security in the
neighbouring countries, so that war does not spill
over. The Arab Group believes that the crises in the
Middle East are intertwined, and the latest dangerous
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories
will have grave repercussions on the Middle East.
We have seen that happening. Therefore, any effort to
stop escalation and a regional conflict should take into
account the root cause of instability, namely, the Israeli
aggression on the Palestinian people.
In that regard, the Arab Group calls upon all
countries that have yet to recognize the State of
Palestine to immediately do so based on 4 June 1967
borders. We also support the full membership of the
Palestinian State at the United Nations. We call for the
holding of an international peace conference based on
the resolutions of international legitimacy. A just and
sustainable solution to the Palestinian question in line
with resolutions of international legitimacy and the
Arab Peace Initiative is the only guarantee for stability
and security in the region.
The Arab Group reaffirms the urgent need
to promote international efforts to end the Israeli
occupation and ensure the independence of the State
of Palestine along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital and in line with the two-State
solution and the relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy. We stress that peace in the Middle East
requires the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan.
We also call upon the Council to shoulder its legal
responsibility in that regard and to give hope to the
peoples of the region for security, stability and a free,
dignified life.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
is gravely worried by the catastrophic situation in
the Gaza Strip and the signs of increasing escalation
and instability in the wider region. We are deeply
concerned about t

[pnpm archive: text truncated at 200 KB; 204710 of 293203 bytes of extracted text kept]
