Basseterre, St. Kitts, July 30, 2019 (SKNIS): St. Kitts and Nevis took a significant and historic step forward on Monday, July 29, when Foreign Minister, the Honourable Mark Brantley, signed an agreement with the State of Palestine’s Foreign Minister and Expatriates, His Excellency (H.E.) Dr. Riad Malki, establishing diplomatic relations between both countries.
During a brief but meaningful ceremony, Minister Brantley welcomed H.E. Dr. Malki to the shores of St. Kitts and Nevis, noting the importance of such an agreement.
“We are aware that the State of Palestine has some 135 countries. I am advised that the United Nations recognizes most of them and we appreciate certainly the need to develop good relations with all nations and to seek to advance the interest of peace, security and democracy globally,” said Minister Brantley. “And so, St. Kitts and Nevis is very pleased that we are here today for this very historic occasion.”
St. Kitts and Nevis’ foreign minister said that the Federation is looking forward to a fruitful relationship.
“We want to commit to a long and mutually beneficial relationship, and we want to say that we hope that we can work closely together on matters of mutual interest… such as climate change, global peace and security, respect for sovereignty, respect for the rule of law, respect for democracy and democratic norms,” he said. “All of these are matters that we cherish in St. Kitts and Nevis, and that we hope to be able to work with you and your government and people on.”
Foreign Minister Brantley used the occasion to express thanks and appreciation to the Government and people of the State and Palestine. He added that St. Kitts and Nevis is a small but important country in the Caribbean, “and certainly we have a voice in the international community and a voice that in the past, we have been willing to lend in support of Palestine and the Palestinian people.”
H.E. Dr. Malki shared similar sentiments and reiterated Palestine’s “full batting and commitment”. He said that the State of Palestine is keen on building diplomatic relations with other countries.
“We do believe in a comprehensive vision where we should be friends of all and that is why having and or recognizing Palestine does not mean that you stop being friends of Israel. I think that you know that the important element of it is that you could be friends of both and by being friends of both you could always contribute and send positive messages to both sides,” said Dr. Malki. “This for us is very important and we appreciate that very much. This is exactly what we are looking for, for countries to be friends of all and in order to promote peace, stability and security everywhere.”
The State of Palestine’s foreign minister assured Minister Brantley that his country will do its “utmost best to ensure that peace, stability and security will prevail”. He expressed Palestine’s readiness to share their knowledge and experiences in several areas where the country has excelled.
Since 2015, St. Kitts and Nevis has further established diplomatic relations with 36 countries worldwide.
