Go to main content
Text size
To change text size, press Ctrl (Cmd on a Mac) and press + to increase or - to decrease.
English
Vis denne siden på norsk
Siidu ii gávdno sámegillii
Sámegiel álgosiidui
Government.no
Menu Search
Search
Selected links
Search
Topics
Topics
Anti-corruption
Business and industry
Climate and environment
Consumers
Culture, sports and non-profit work
Defence
Education
Elections and democracy
Energy
Equality and diversity
European policy
Families and children
Food, fisheries and agriculture
Foreign affairs
Health and care
Immigration and integration
Indigenous Peoples and Minorities
Labour
Law and order
Pensions and welfare
Public administration
Research
Svalbard and the Polar Areas
The economy
Ocean
Transport and communications
Ukraine
Close menu
Documents
Find document
The National Budget 2026
The Revised National Budget 2026
Consultations
Draft resolutions and bills
White papers
Official Norwegian Reports (NOUs)
Guidelines and brochures
Reports, plans and strategies
Letters
Acts and regulations
Circulars
Close menu
What's new
What's new
News and press releases
Speeches and statements
Calendar
Press contacts
Close menu
Historical archive
Ministries
Ministries
Office of the Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre (Labour Party)
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Nils Kristen Sandtrøen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Children and Families Lene Vågslid (Labour Party)
Ministry of Climate and Environment Sigrun Aasland (Labour Party)
Ministry of Culture and Equality Lubna Jaffery (Labour Party)
Ministry of Defence Tore O. Sandvik (Labour Party)
Ministry of Digitalisation and Public Governance Torgeir Micaelsen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Education and Research Kari Nessa Nordtun (Labour Party) Eileen Fugelsnes (Labour Party)
Ministry of Energy Terje Aasland (Labour Party)
Ministry of Finance Jens Stoltenberg (Labour Party)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide (Labour Party) Åsmund Aukrust (Labour Party)
Ministry of Health and Care Services Jan Christian Vestre (Labour Party)
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Fisheries Cecilie Myrseth (Labour Party) Marianne Sivertsen Næss (Labour Party)
Ministry of Justice and Public Security Astri Aas-Hansen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion Kjersti Stenseng (Labour Party)
Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development Bjørnar Selnes Skjæran (Labour Party)
Ministry of Transport Kamzy Gunaratnam (Labour Party)
Close menu
The Government
The Government
Støre’s Government
Members of the Government
Find news
How is Norway governed?
Change of Government in Norway
How is Norway governed?
Norway's Governments since 1814
Norway's Governments 1814 -
Statistics
Close menu
Historical archive
You are here:
Home
What's new
What's new
Press contacts
Webcasts
News and press releases
Speeches and statements
Calendar
News
Norway recognises Palestine today
News
Share
Share
Facebook
X/Twitter
LinkedIn
Epost
Close
Citation
Citation
The citation is retrieved automatically from the page and may be incomplete or contain errors.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (2024, 28. May). Norway recognises Palestine today [News story]. Government.no. https://www.regjeringen.no/en/whats-new/norway-recognises-palestine-today/id3040890/
Copy citation
Close
Print
Norway recognises Palestine today
News story | Date: 28/05/2024 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Les på norsk
This content is more than 2 years old.
‘For over 30 years, Norway has been one of the strongest advocates of a Palestinian state. Norway’s recognition of Palestine as a state today represents a milestone in Norwegian-Palestinian relations,’ said Minister of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide.
Foreign Minister Eide handed over a document confirming Norway's recognition of Palestine to the Palestinian Prime Minister. Credit: Mathias Rongved/MFA
The Minister of Foreign Affairs presented a document with the formal recognition to Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammed Mustafa at a meeting in Brussels on Sunday 26 May.
‘It was important to be able to present a formal document to Prime Minister Mohammed Mustafa in person. He greatly values Norway’s engagement and our efforts to promote a two-state solution. Norway’s recognition of Palestine as a state is a clear message of support to the moderate forces in both countries,’ said Mr Eide.
Mr Eide led two meetings in Brussels on 26 May where the crisis in Palestine and the need for a two-state solution were discussed.
‘I am confident that the Palestinian Government will continue the challenging reform efforts and lay the foundation needed to govern in the West Bank and Gaza once a ceasefire is in place. During the meetings in Brussels this weekend, Prime Minister Mustafa presented his plans for reforming and strengthening the Palestinian Authority, and these were favourably received by the partner countries. It is regrettable that the Israeli Government is showing little willingness to engage constructively in the process. The international community must increase its political and economic support to Palestine and continue to work towards a two-state solution,’ Mr Eide said.
Facts
Norway’s recognition of Palestine: Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre and Minister of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide announced on Wednesday 22 May that Norway would recognise Palestine as a state. On Friday 24 May, the decision was adopted by Royal Decree. A formal document was presented to the Palestinian Prime Minister on Sunday 26 May. The recognition entered into force on Tuesday 28 May.
Why is Norway’s recognition of Palestine as a state important? Norway’s recognition of Palestine as a state is an important political declaration of support to the Palestinian people at a time when their right to self-determination is under enormous pressure. At the same time, this decision makes it clear that, in Norway’s view, Palestine has fulfilled the legal criteria for statehood and that Norway regards Palestine as an independent state with all the rights and duties this entails.
Norway’s recognition also means that we expect Palestine to fulfil its obligations and claim its rights as a state under international law. Among other things, Norway expects all relations with Palestine to be founded on the fundamental rules of international law relating to independence, equality and peaceful coexistence. Norway will be able to enter into bilateral agreements with Palestine and in this way establish obligations under international law between our two states. Recognition will also have a direct legal effect in Norway in areas where issues relating to the State of Palestine are involved.
Territorial demarcation: Norway recognises Palestine as a state in line with international law and relevant resolutions by the UN Security Council. The territorial demarcation between the state of Palestine and the state of Israel should be based on the pre-1967 borders, i.e. the demarcation line as set out in the 1949 Armistice Agreements, with Jerusalem as the capital of both states and without prejudice to a final settlement on borders, including the use of land swaps.
Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre and Minister of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide at the press conference when they announced that Norway recognizes Palestine. Credit: Mathias Rongved/MFA
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Topic
Foreign affairs
Peace and conflict resolution
Related
News and press releases about the crisis in the The Middle East
Norway recognises Palestine as a state
Press release | 22.05.2024
Go to the top
Government.no
About this website
News Alert
Right of use and copyright for photos and video material
Manage cookies
Responsible for the ministry's webpages:
Responsible editor: Head of Communications Tuva Bogsnes
Web editor: Martin Brynildsrud Andersson
Phone: +47 23 95 00 00
E-mail: post@mfa.no
Organisation number: 972 417 920
