This content is more than 1 year old.
Ten medical students from Gaza are to be granted permission to come to Norway to take part in an exchange visit at the University of Oslo.
‘The situation in Gaza is dire. Despite the enormous need for acute, life-saving medical care in Gaza, only 16 of Gaza’s 34 hospitals are currently partially operational. Hundreds of health workers have been killed, and it is extremely difficult for aid organisations to get medical personnel into Gaza. The shortage of healthcare personnel will make it even harder for an already overwhelmed health system to cope with the ongoing humanitarian catastrophe. The Norwegian Government has therefore decided to allow 10 medical students from Gaza to come to Norway to take part in an exchange visit at the University of Oslo. This, together with similar support from other countries, could in the long term make a difference to the health system in Gaza,’ said Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre.
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security today instructed the Norwegian Directorate of Immigration (UDI) to grant time-limited student visas to the students in question. One of the students has already received a residence permit from UDI. The instructions given by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security apply to the other nine students.
Under Norway’s Immigration Act, UDI is responsible for making decisions in individual cases. It is rare for the Ministry of Justice and Public Security to intervene in individual cases. It does so only when foreign policy considerations or fundamental national interests are involved. In such cases the Ministry may instruct UDI.
‘Our assessment is that there are important foreign policy considerations in this case. There is an enormous need for health workers in Gaza, and these 10 students will be able to help to fill this gap in the years ahead. On this basis, we have decided today to grant residence permits to the students. This may also inspire other countries to contribute in similar ways,’ said Minister of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide.
‘The threshold for instructing UDI in individual cases is high. This is as it should be. An exception was made in this case due to the extraordinary situation now facing the health sector in Gaza,’ said Mr Støre.
‘The healthcare situation in Gaza is catastrophic. There is a severe shortage of health workers in Gaza. Hundreds have been killed and many have been displaced. The hospitals have been bombed and it is extremely difficult for aid organisations to get medical equipment and personnel into Gaza,’ said the Prime Minister.
The medical students are affiliated with Al-Azhar University in Gaza. Al-Azhar University has been unable to continue providing education because of the war. Al-Shifa Hospital, where the medical students received practical training, has also been bombed. In Norway, the students will participate in an exchange programme at the University of Oslo’s Faculty of Medicine.
