Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9453
Security Council
Seventy-eighth year
9453rd meeting
Wednesday, 25 October 2023, 3.40 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Vieira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Brazil)
Members: Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hoxha
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pérez Loose
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ishikane
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hauri
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Nusseibeh
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. Wood
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
23-32023 (E)
*2332023*

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
2/12 23-32023
The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel, the Sudan and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2023/792 and S/2023/795, each of which
contains the text of a separate draft resolution.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Last week, I said that the Council needed
to let diplomacy play out and that we needed to give
Secretary-General Guterres, President Biden and
Secretary Blinken, as well as regional leaders, the
chance to move progress forward (see S/PV.9442).
Over the past few days, we have seen the fruits of that
diplomacy. Thanks to the leadership of the United
Nations, the United States, Israel, Egypt and other
countries and partners, humanitarian aid has started to
reach Gaza.
However, much more help is needed. The United
States will continue to work with our partners to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief into Gaza.
This draft resolution (S/2023/792) will support that
effort. Our text calls for the rapid expansion of aid
delivery. We must do everything in our power to meet
the dire humanitarian needs of the Palestinians in Gaza.
We also welcome the release over the past few
days of four people who were being held hostage by
Hamas. We thank Qatar and Egypt for their mediation
efforts. But roughly 200 people are not yet free.
We heard yesterday, in this very Chamber, how so
many families still do not know the whereabouts or
conditions of their loved ones (see S/PV.9451). Parents
lie awake at night wondering if they will ever see their
child again. Yesterday I met with two of those parents,
Rachel Goldberg and Jon Polin. Their 23-year-old
son, Hersh — an American citizen — was seriously
injured and taken hostage by Hamas. No parent should
have to experience that kind of agony and pain. It is
heartbreaking, and it is infuriating. A vote for this
draft resolution (S/2023/792) sends the message that
every single hostage must be released immediately,
without conditions.
This moment is a test for all of us — for the
international community and for the Council itself. The
United States has worked to forge a consensus around a
draft resolution that is strong and balanced. We solicited
input. We listened. We engaged with all Council
members to incorporate edits, including language on
humanitarian pauses and the protection of civilians
fleeing conflict and language on the importance of
deconfliction mechanisms to protect United Nations
facilities and personnel. Those are important additions
to the text — ones that we support and ones that we
should all support. This draft resolution (S/2023/792)
also reflects input from numerous humanitarian
organizations working to save lives.
The United States was not interested in putting
forward a draft resolution just to put forward a draft
resolution. We were determined to craft a draft
resolution that would enjoy broad support, reflect the
facts on the ground and bolster the work of the United
Nations and the urgent, direct diplomacy that the vast
majority of Council members support.
Our approach stands in stark contrast to Russia’s.
Russia has put forward a draft resolution (S/2023/795)
at the very last minute with zero consultation. I will
note that when putting together our draft resolution
(S/2023/792), we gave Russia’s feedback the same
consideration we gave to that of other Council members.
The bottom line is this: Russia has offered up yet another
draft resolution in bad faith and the Council should not
stand for it. Instead, we should come together around
the draft resolution proposed by the United States — a
resolution that not only includes but also builds on many
elements of the draft resolution that Brazil put forward
last week (S/2023/773).
Our draft resolution unequivocally condemns the
heinous terrorist attacks by Hamas and other terrorist
groups. It affirms the right of Member States to defend
themselves against the threat to peace and security
posed by acts of terrorism. It urges all parties to
fully respect and comply with their obligations under
international law. It underscores the need to protect

25/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9453
23-32023 3/12
civilians and humanitarian workers, including United
Nations officials and medical personnel. It calls for all
measures, specifically humanitarian pauses, to allow for
full, rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access. It
stresses that Member States must take concrete steps
to prevent an expansion of the conflict beyond Gaza.
It underscores the need to work together to deprive
Hamas of the funding and weapons it uses to spread
terror. It makes clear that we must continue to work
towards a future in which two democratic States, Israel
and Palestine, live side by side in peace. That is clearly
not what Hamas wants to see.
The United States worked exhaustively to draft a
strong and balanced text that meets the present moment,
and we urge all Council members to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For two weeks now, the Security Council has
been unable to send a collective signal for de-escalation
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict zone. That is
extremely lamentable. The bloodshed continues, with
thousands of civilians killed or wounded and more than
1.5 million people internally displaced. Let us take a
moment to reflect on those monstrous numbers.
Russia proposed the adoption of a draft resolution
calling for a humanitarian ceasefire (S/2023/772) on
16 October. It was a short, depoliticized and entirely
humanitarian text. Unfortunately, it was not supported
by the majority of Council members (see S/PV.9439).
National interests — frankly speaking, self-centred
ideological and political interests — prevailed over the
aim of stopping the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe.
Exactly one week ago (see S/PV.9442), the
United States blocked the Council’s second attempt
to produce a response to the horrific crisis by vetoing
the humanitarian draft resolution prepared by Brazil
(S/2023/773). Moreover, the United States was the only
member to vote against the amendments we proposed
calling for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire and
the condemnation of all indiscriminate attacks on
civilians (S/2023/775 and S/2023/776). That made it
clear that the United States simply does not want the
decisions of the Security Council to influence in any
way a possible ground offensive by Israel against Gaza.
Such an offensive, accompanied by gross violations of
international humanitarian law, would risk provoking
an even larger-scale conflict in the region and perhaps
even beyond.
Now, in an attempt to muffle the international
community’s harsh criticism of its use of the veto, the
United States is trying to push through a new draft
resolution full of politicized, inappropriate and extremely
dubious provisions (S/2023/792). I would like to point
out separately that there was no normal consultative
process for the draft resolution in the Council, despite
the fact that our American colleague has just assured us
to the contrary. The sponsors ignored virtually all the
comments made by delegations, as well as the Council’s
established practice for working on draft documents.
The United States delegation explicitly denied other
Council members the opportunity to consult with their
capitals by setting unrealistic deadlines.
It is therefore not surprising that the final product
fell short of even the most minimal standards. It
still does not include a call for a ceasefire or a
condemnation of the indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and civilian objects in Gaza. It does not oppose any
actions designed to forcibly displace civilians. It is a
thoroughly politicized document whose sole purpose is
not to save civilians but to secure United States political
precepts in the region by applying its own particular
labels. The authors of the draft resolution resorted to
a tactical ploy by stuffing their text with a haphazard
set of humanitarian measures that Israel could take
in conducting its ground offensive. However, they of
course made sure that nothing in the draft would prevent
West Jerusalem from carrying that offensive out. The
United States draft resolution is essentially a licence
from the Security Council for Israel to do just that,
while thousands of Palestinian children continue to die.
The Council cannot be tied to such a draft resolution,
whose adoption would discredit it utterly. My American
colleague mentioned the many non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) that are providing assistance.
I would like to point out that the first thing that the
NGOs and humanitarian organizations that want to
help are asking for is a ceasefire.
A separate and major legal problem for the draft
resolution is its reference to Israel’s right to self-
defence, which, as confirmed by the International
Court of Justice’s 2004 advisory opinion on the Legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273), is
inapplicable in the case of an occupying Power, which
is what Israel is with regard to the Palestinian territory.
We see no point in supporting a document that is
designed for one purpose and one purpose only — to

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
4/12 23-32023
serve the geopolitical interests of one of the members of
the Council. The document does not merely fail to stop
an escalation, it actually gives it a green light, leaving
room only for further forceful steps to be taken alongside
toothless humanitarian conditions. We hope that most of
our Council colleagues will take the same action as we
will on this draft resolution. Otherwise, as I said, it would
be an extremely serious blow to the Council’s authority.
In order to nonetheless enable the Council to fulfil its
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, we have prepared an alternative draft resolution
(S/2023/795). It is based on trusted humanitarian
language and incorporates the most useful elements
from the United States draft resolution, as well as the
previous draft resolutions of Brazil (S/2023/773) and
Russia (S/2023/772). We see no reason for the members
of the Security Council to refuse to support it — unless a
ceasefire and stopping this new wave of violence have no
place in their plans. This is the Council’s last chance to
fulfil the noble functions entrusted to it, and we call on
everyone not to miss it.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolutions before it.
I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2023/792, submitted by the
United States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana, Japan,
Malta, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
China, Russian Federation, United Arab Emirates
Abstaining:
Brazil, Mozambique
The President: The draft resolution received 10
votes in favour, 3 against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of Amer-
ica): The United States is deeply disappointed that
Russia and China vetoed draft resolution S/2023/792,
which, as I have said, was strong, balanced and the prod-
uct of consultations among the members of the Secu-
rity Council. We listened to everyone, we incorporated
feedback and we worked to forge consensus around a
draft resolution that would send a clear message to the
world — and most importantly, to Israelis and Palestini-
ans — that the Council is determined to meet this moment.
We should not encourage Russia’s cynical and
irresponsible behaviour by voting in favour of its text,
draft resolution S/2023/795, which, as I said earlier, was
offered up at the very last minute, with zero consultation,
and which contains a number of problematic sections.
Though today’s vote was a setback, we must not be
deterred. The United States stands by its draft text. And
we stand ready to work with all Member States to support
the efforts of the Secretary-General, President Biden and
Secretary Blinken, in cooperation with many countries
around this table and in the region, to build a more
peaceful and secure future for Israelis and Palestinians
alike.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted against draft resolution S/2023/792. Our position
is based on facts, law, conscience, justice and the urgent
calls of the entire world, in particular the Arab countries.
We all recall that last Wednesday, draft resolution
S/2023/773, which focused on the humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, emphasized
the protection of civilians and was supported by an
overwhelming majority of members of the Security
Council, failed to be adopted owing to the use of the
veto (see S/PV.9442). On Saturday evening, the United
States introduced a new draft resolution that set aside the
consensus of the members and included many elements
that were still deeply divisive and went far beyond the
humanitarian realm. Many Council members, including
China, Russia, the United Arab Emirates and Brazil,
proposed amendments to the text. However, the sponsor,
ignoring the major concerns of relevant members, made
only cosmetic changes to the draft resolution before the
text was put in blue in order to rush the Council to vote on
it. In terms of its content, the draft resolution is seriously
unbalanced and confuses right and wrong. In terms of
its approach, it was introduced in haste and lacked the
consensus it needed. In terms of effectiveness, it does not
reflect the world’s very strong calls for a ceasefire and an
end to the fighting, and it does not help resolve the issue.
Based on the above, the draft resolution is evidently not
in a position to be adopted.

25/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9453
23-32023 5/12
China in no way opposes that the Security Council
take action. On the contrary, we have always strongly
called on the Council to play a responsible role. What
we object to is that the draft resolution is evasive on
the most pressing issue of ending the fighting and
never calls for an immediate ceasefire in clear and
unambiguous language. At this moment, a ceasefire
is not only a diplomatic term, but means the life and
death of many more civilians. It is irresponsible and
extremely dangerous for a Security Council resolution
to be ambiguous on issues of war and peace. It is
tantamount to paving the way for large-scale military
action and giving a green light to further escalation
of war.
China is by no means indifferent to acts that harm
civilians. On the contrary, we immediately and strongly
condemn all violence and attacks against civilians and
call for diplomatic efforts to promote the early release
of the hostages. What we object to is that the draft
resolution does not call on the parties concerned to stop
the indiscriminate and asymmetric use of force, nor
does it require a thorough investigation into the heinous
attack on Al Ahli Hospital. This selective application of
international law and these double standards will only
push more innocent civilians to the brink of death.
China is by no means indifferent to the suffering
of the people in Gaza. On the contrary, China has
consistently made strong calls for the opening of relief
corridors, ensuring humanitarian access and avoiding a
humanitarian disaster. What we object to is that the draft
resolution selectively avoids referring to the root causes
of the current humanitarian crisis in Gaza and fails to
urge Israel to lift its comprehensive blockade of Gaza
and to rescind the evacuation order in northern Gaza.
Such an evasive approach will only accelerate Gaza’s
descent into an even greater humanitarian disaster.
China in no way denies Israel’s security concerns.
On the contrary, we have always strongly advocated
paying equal attention to the security concerns and
legitimate rights of both Israel and Palestine. What we
oppose is that the draft resolution attempts to establish a
new narrative on the Palestinian-Israeli issue, ignoring
the fact that the Palestinian territories have been
occupied for a long time, and avoids the fundamental
issue of independent statehood for the Palestinian
people. It is alarming that the draft resolution deviates
from the spirit of previous United Nations resolutions
and embeds the dangerous logic of confrontation of
civilizations and the justification of war and the use of
force. If adopted, the draft resolution will completely
ruin the prospects for the realization of the two-State
solution and plunge the Palestinian and Israeli people
into a vicious cycle of hatred and confrontation.
Based on that, China will vote in favour of the
draft resolution proposed by the Russian Federation
(S/2023/795).
China has no selfish interests on the question of
Palestine. Any initiative that contributes to peace will
receive China’s staunch support. China will do its best
to advance any endeavour that facilitates Palestinian-
Israeli reconciliation. Since the outbreak of a new
round of conflict between Palestine and Israel, China
has actively advocated that the Security Council take
meaningful action and make binding decisions on
the situation between Palestine and Israel as soon
as possible. We also emphasize that the actions and
decisions of the Security Council must respect historical
facts, take the correct direction, and reflect due
responsibility and a will to rise to the occasion so as to
ensure that they can withstand the test of morality and
conscience. We are ready to continue to work with the
members of the Security Council and the international
community to play a constructive role in putting an end
to the fighting, protecting civilians, avoiding greater
humanitarian disasters and achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank the United States
for their work and genuine efforts in narrowing the
differences as much as possible in order to respond
to the urgency of the situation on the ground. We
welcomed the balanced draft resolution (S/2023/792),
which condemns the terrorist attack of Hamas and
calls for the liberation of hostages, expresses sympathy
for all innocent victims, reaffirms the right of States
to self-defence, in compliance with the obligations
under international law and calls for the protection of
civilians and for humanitarian pauses and humanitarian
corridors in order to ensure unhindered humanitarian
aid to those in need. It also welcomes the efforts of all
regional and international actors to avoid a spillover
and reaffirms the commitment to a political solution
to the Middle East conflict. Albania deeply regrets that
the draft resolution was vetoed.
We know that perfection is the enemy of good.
There are times when the urgency of the matter and the
complexity of the issue requires swift action and for
doing the best possible under the given circumstances,

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
6/12 23-32023
even though one would have liked and hoped for more.
This draft resolution was certainly one of those cases
because there is a time to draw a line in order to make
actions matter and have the impact we are seeking.
The United States draft resolution may not have been
ideal. We supported it as an improved and reasonable
way forward at this time, at this very particular
moment, responding to critical issues and urgent needs
as the best possible way to condemn terrorism and to
respond to the urgency to protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian aid on the ground. We therefore deeply
regret that the Security Council was prevented from
deciding on a text that provides for the urgently needed
humanitarian pauses and humanitarian corridors.
This veto will not help the people in Gaza. It
will not help those taken hostage. It will not help
humanitarian workers, and it will not make it easier for
the United Nations on the ground. And as the Security
Council proves unable to take the right decisions, we
know the result — Hamas and other terrorists and
extremist groups will feel empowered because there is
no internationally agreed condemnation and there is no
global sanctioning of the unacceptable.
Despite these successive failures, we must not lose
hope. We cannot renounce because it is not only our
job, it is our responsibility. We will continue to work
in good faith to have the Council act on this critical
issue in a balanced and fair manner and discharge its
responsibilities, but also maintain its deeply affected
credibility.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2023/792, which we
have just considered in the Council. It was introduced
after a negotiating process in which many members of
the Council participated. The resulting draft resolution
contains elements of great urgency and relevance. For
example, it reaffirms the obligation to respect and
comply fully with all obligations under international
law, international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
The draft resolution also requests that all necessary
measures be adopted, especially a humanitarian pause,
in order to allow for full, rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, and indicates that humanitarian
and medical personnel must be respected and protected.
States have a right to defend their population and to self-
defence but must respect the principles of international
humanitarian law at all times. We believe that this was
clearly set out in the draft resolution.
I am convinced that each and every member of the
Council believes that the text could be improved upon,
but I am also fully convinced that we are not all going
to agree on what part needs to be improved or how to
do it. It will not help us to seek a perfect text when it is
far too late or when it becomes irrelevant. As I pointed
out last Wednesday (see S/PV.9442), we are convinced
that the Council must not remain silent in view of clear
threats to international peace and security, with ever-
worsening humanitarian consequences. We therefore
deplore the fact that once again, in less than a week,
we have been unable to adopt a majority decision in the
Council because of the use of the veto.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan voted in favour of
the draft resolution proposed by the United States
(S/2023/792), in the hope that it would help improve
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and prevent further
deterioration. It is therefore our deep regret that the
draft resolution was not adopted.
We must ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those
desperately in need and that draft resolution would
have taken measurable steps to those ends. In fact, it
contains many important and positive elements for
addressing the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which is
deteriorating as never before. We cannot agree with the
argument that the draft resolution could be construed
as something that gives the green light to unlawful acts.
I ask those who have any doubt about that to please read
it carefully themselves.
We are grateful for the ongoing diplomatic
outreach of key actors, including the United States,
towards de-escalation. We also stress that civilian and
humanitarian facilities must be protected by all parties,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, it is important that the Council
remain engaged on this file and be ready to act whenever
necessary. The world is counting on us.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2023/795,
submitted by the Russian Federation, the Republic of
the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Gabon, Russian Federation, United Arab
Emirates

25/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9453
23-32023 7/12
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland
The President: The draft resolution received 4
votes in favour, 2 against and 9 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret the fact that the Security Council
has once again failed to take the opportunity to respond
to the unprecedented crisis in the Middle East.
I have already provided a detailed account of the
reasons why the draft resolution submitted by the United
States (S/2023/792) is absolutely unacceptable to us.
It is very unfortunate that Council members, while
remaining fixated on their national agendas, did not
have the courage to show strategic wisdom and support
the draft resolution proposed by Russia (S/2023/795).
Our Albanian colleague, who lamented the lack of
condemnation of the terrorist attacks, had an opportunity
to rectify that by voting in favour of the draft resolution.
Apparently, he did not read it carefully enough to see
all the relevant elements, the inclusion of which he had
requested in his customary emotional manner.
We regret the fact that the Security Council has not
lived up to expectations. We tried our best to help. The
task of preventing further escalation of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict is now up to the General Assembly.
We support the relevant draft resolution proposed by
Jordan on behalf of the Group of Arab States, which
we co-sponsored, and we call on all Member States to
support that document.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I will keep
this short, because frankly it is not worth wasting any
more time discussing Russia’s bad-faith draft resolution
(S/2023/795).
The United States could not support yet another
Russian draft resolution that was put forward with no
consultation and failed to reflect the realities on the
ground. It is disappointing that Russia would rather
try and score political points and further divide the
Council than address the current urgent needs of Israelis
and Palestinians.
We all see that Russia is doing nothing to engage any
of the relevant parties or to support diplomatic efforts,
including by the United Nations, to get more aid into
Gaza. We will say this again — the United States stands
ready to work with all Member States that are genuinely
committed to advancing peace and security. We must put
the interests of the region and the world above all else.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The votes
of the United Arab Emirates today were made strictly
on the merit of the draft resolutions submitted to the
Security Council (S/2023/792 and S/2023/795) and how
they tangibly respond to the dire situation in Gaza. We
know what the most pressing humanitarian needs are.
The United Nations and non-governmental organizations
have made them very clear — an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire; the release of all hostages; safe, sustained and
at-scale humanitarian access; fuel for hospitals and
desalination plants; water; and adherence to international
humanitarian law.
Yesterday we heard dozens of statements imploring
the Council to assign the same value to Palestinian life as
it does to Israeli life. We cannot allow any equivocation
on that point — there is no hierarchy of civilian lives.
The needs I mentioned must be the priorities for any
resolution adopted by the Council.
Furthermore, we cannot be silent on the question of
forced displacement and the evacuation order. Crucially,
the Gaza Strip is occupied territory. There should be
no ambiguity about that. We still hope that forging
consensus is possible, but it is clear it will require more
work. The stakes are too high. Civilians in Gaza cannot
be abandoned. The Security Council must step up, as
we heard clearly from countless foreign ministers just
yesterday, and that is the work to which the United Arab
Emirates will turn now.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Gabon voted in favour of the draft resolutions submitted
by the United States delegation (S/2023/792) and the
Russian delegation (S/2023/795), respectively, to express
our support for the Palestinian people and for the Israeli
people and our commitment to peace. That commitment
to peace and the protection of civilians also led us to
vote in favour of the draft resolutions submitted by
Russia (S/2023/772) and Brazil (S/2023/773), on 16 and
18 October, respectively.

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
8/12 23-32023
With today’s vote, my country reaffirms its
support for any initiative that enables human lives
to be saved. Elements that will improve the fate of
civilians and ensure de-escalation are set out in both
the draft resolutions on which action was taken today,
which Gabon supported, including the condemnation
of the Hamas terrorist attacks on Israel on 7 October;
the need to respect international law, ensure the safety
of civilians and civilian infrastructure, and protect
humanitarian workers and goods; the importance
of a continuous, adequate and unhindered supply of
essential goods and services for civilians in Gaza; the
need for the immediate release of all hostages, without
conditions; the commitment to a peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; and the commitment to
a two-State solution.
We regret that the antagonism within the Council
and the lack of unity prevented us from arriving at a
consensus text. We are aware that the texts presented do
not take into account all legitimate concerns, but Gabon
believes that the draft resolutions contain elements that
can make a difference on the ground, in particular with
regard to the humanitarian situation.
The acts of terror perpetrated by Hamas on 7 October
triggered the resumption of large-scale hostilities on
Israeli soil in Gaza and the occupied West Bank. All the
indiscriminate bombardments that followed have led to
an escalation of violence, with tragic consequences for
the civilian populations and the stability of the region,
and they demand a response from our Council.
Once again, Gabon urges all parties to exercise
restraint and respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Unimpeded and
sustained access, a cessation of orders for the forced
displacement of the people of Gaza, the opening of
humanitarian corridors and the unconditional release
of hostages will undoubtedly contribute to the calm
we all seek. At the same time, we reiterate our call for
the blockade of Gaza to be lifted and for a cessation of
hostilities that will put an end to the despair of men,
women and children who are now confronting death.
We support the Israeli victims. It is crucial that
those responsible for the violence perpetrated by Hamas
be brought to justice for their actions.
We will never stop repeating that the solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is political and that
diplomacy, negotiation and dialogue are the only
weapons available to the international community to
ensure that the legitimate concerns of all parties, self-
determination and the right to security are respected
and that peace and security for the Palestinian and
Israeli people are guaranteed.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): We
regret that draft resolution S/2023/792, proposed by the
United States was not adopted. The text would have
had a real impact on the ground by calling for hostages
to be released and for aid to get in, including through
humanitarian pauses. Through the draft resolution,
the Security Council would have rightly, and for
the first time, unequivocally condemned Hamas’s
terrorist attacks.
The United Kingdom could not support draft
resolution S/2023/795, proposed by Russia, which once
again failed to recognize Israel’s right to self-defence.
As so many of us have said, there is a grave crisis
unfolding in the Middle East. The Russian text was put
to a vote without a single minute of consultation with
the Council members. It was not a serious attempt to
have the Council speak with one voice.
We are committed to continuing to work across the
Council towards a balanced text that condemns Hamas,
reaffirms Israel’s right to defend itself, is clear on the
need for everything to be done to protect civilians in
line with international humanitarian law and gets more
aid flowing into Gaza.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): We regret that once
again the veto has been used to prevent the Council
from shouldering its responsibilities in a critical
situation that demands decisive action.
The trajectory of the ongoing war between the State
of Israel and Hamas is simply not sustainable and could
engulf the entire region if we do not effectively mobilize
as a Council. The civilian cost so far is unacceptable
and more human suffering will occur if we do not act.
It is for that reason that we are deeply saddened
by the Council’s continuing inability to positively
influence events on the ground by speaking with one
voice to protect civilians and to stop the bloodshed.
Indeed, Ghana had hoped that United States-sponsored
draft resolution S/2023/792, which, as a Council, we had
worked on over the weekend to improve the humanitarian
language, including clear references to humanitarian
pauses, could have garnered Council support.

25/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9453
23-32023 9/12
While we supported draft resolution, we still
believe that the order for civilians and United Nations
staff to evacuate all areas in Gaza north of Wadi Gaza
and to relocate to southern Gaza needs to be rescinded
to save human lives.
We thank the Russian Federation for its draft
resolution S/2023/795. However, we would have wished
for more time to consider the various proposals.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for all efforts
to be directed towards de-escalating the rising tensions
and for our actions to be guided by humanitarian
considerations even in this difficult and tragic moment.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Efforts at this very juncture
should be focused on the humanitarian problems that
continue to deteriorate. From that viewpoint, the
Russian draft resolution S/2023/795 contains important
elements. We note the incorporation of language from
draft resolution S/2023/773, submitted by Brazil,
and draft resolution S/2023/792, submitted by the
United States.
At the same time, the Council, which has the
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, should refer to practical measures that
could deter and prevent heinous terror attacks, such as
the prevention of arms exports or disrupting financing.
We also think it is important for every Member
State — every Member State — to recognize the right
to defend itself and its people. Every Member State,
without distinction has such right, which has to be
exercised in full compliance with international law.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As
I said yesterday (see S/PV.9451), the Council must not
become an arena for rivalries among its members but
rather a space for reconciliation and international peace
and security.
The Council’s draft resolutions must be understood
as tools that contribute to achieving our collective
goals. They must not be an end in themselves, much
less become political or media trophies.
The text of a draft resolution must not be decided
simply by the will of a single member, without allowing
any comments from the others. Negotiations in good
faith must be the basis of any product of the Council. To
not respect that principle would create a very dangerous
precedent. For that and no other reason, we abstained in
the voting.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Middle East calls for united and urgent
action by the Council. We have all talked about this
since the shocking and unjustifiable acts of terror
perpetrated by Hamas against innocent Israeli civilians
on 7 October, which we firmly condemn.
Our priorities are the protection of civilians, rapid
and unhindered humanitarian access to Gaza, the
immediate release of hostages and using our influence
on the parties to prevent further escalation or even the
spread of the conflict in the region.
Switzerland voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2023/792, proposed by the United States, because
in our view it represented a first step for the Council
towards achieving those priorities, even if we would
urge for clearer language, in particular on the protection
of civilians. Switzerland abstained in the voting on the
text presented by Russia (draft resolution S/2023/795)
in the absence of a consultative process and of an
intention to reach a consensus on the substance. Such
a consultative process would have enabled us to submit
alternative proposals for some important elements,
including how to mention the tragic events linked to
the Al Ahli Hospital.
Switzerland recognizes Israel’s legitimate desire
for self-defence and national security. We deplore the
deaths of thousands of civilians — including thousands
of children — in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Gaza. It is regrettable that the
Council has once again been unable to reach a consensus
in order to demonstrate its unity in confronting these
principles and the intensity of a crisis that still risks
spilling over into the entire region. Leaving aside the
non-adoption of the draft resolutions today, Switzerland
reiterates that the parties must respect international
humanitarian law, in particular the principles regarding
the conduct of hostilities — the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution.
The permanent members of the Council have the
power of the veto, which gives them a special and
heightened responsibility regarding the maintenance
of international peace and security. We expect them to
shoulder their responsibilities and to lead a constructive
and inclusive process. Switzerland remains ready to
support every effort by the members of the Council and
their partners to use their influence on the parties to
bring a swift end to the conflict.

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
10/12 23-32023
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): As
the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France,
Catherine Colonna, said before the Security Council
yesterday (see S/PV.9451), the situation in the Middle
East is very dangerous, and is at risk of spilling over
into a conflagration. The Council must therefore act
and uphold its responsibilities. It must unambiguously
condemn the Hamas terrorist attack on Israel and call
for the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages. Lastly, it must call for safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian aid to the people of Gaza. The
Council must also recall that Israel has a right and a
duty to defend itself while respecting international law
and particularly international humanitarian law. France
calls for the establishment of a humanitarian pause,
which could help bring about a ceasefire. It is absolutely
essential for all civilians to be protected.
That is the reason that France voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2023/792, put to a vote by the
United States. France abstained in the voting on draft
resolution S/2023/795, put forward by the Russian
Federation, because several essential elements were
lacking. In particular, the text did not characterize the
Hamas attack as a terrorist attack. Moreover, we regret
that it was not opened for negotiations.
After today’s unfortunate failure, France will
continue, as it has always done, to be committed in
good faith to ensuring that the Council upholds its
responsibilities. It is our collective duty to redesign a
political horizon that can meet the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people, whom Hamas does not
represent. The conditions for a lasting peace are well
known. They are essential guarantees for the security
of Israel and a State for the Palestinians. That is the line
that France defends firmly and will continue to defend.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 elected members of the Security
Council (E10).
We regret that once again the Council has not been
able to exercise its mandate. Confronted as we are
by escalating conflict, a dire humanitarian situation
and the loss of civilian lives, our responsibilities
remain clear and present. The Council is obliged to
maintain international peace and security and to do
its utmost to safeguard the lives of civilians. We also
call for the immediate and unconditional release of all
the remaining hostages. The E10 remains firm in its
belief that we must urgently and genuinely address the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, whose population is on the
brink of calamity. Hundreds of thousands of civilians,
including children, have been displaced. Thousands
have been killed and injured. We cannot add to their
suffering through our inability to find an agreement on
a draft resolution that is desperately needed. The parties
involved must allow aid in, according to their obligation
under international law. We must promote every and
all mechanisms that can contribute to ensuring that
assistance reaches all who are in need throughout Gaza.
Possible options include a humanitarian ceasefire,
humanitarian pauses and humanitarian corridors.
We must ensure the provision of essential goods and
services at scale and in a sustained manner, including
water, fuel, food, electricity and medical supplies.
We also want to remind everyone that civilians are
protected under international law, and we call for their
safe movement and the protection of civilian objects
that are indispensable for the civilian population.
While we welcome the current efforts to allow
humanitarian aid into Gaza through Rafah and commend
all partners involved, we note that the current volume
of aid is utterly inadequate when assessed against the
population’s actual needs. The crisis is also gripped by
a growing risk of regional spillover, which demands our
undivided attention. We must mitigate those risks by
urging all the parties to exercise restraint, de-escalate
and respect the norms of international law. It is for that
reason that the E10 will be working on a new draft
proposal in the coming days. As elected members of the
Council, we also represent the rest of the international
community, and we have a duty and an obligation to
act. There is no time to waste.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I would like to begin by
expressing our deep gratitude to the United States
and every other member of the Security Council that
supported draft resolution S/2023/792. Voting for a
draft resolution that clearly condemns savage genocidal
terrorists while standing up for a Member State’s right
to defend itself against terror shows that despite all
the libellous falsehoods that are spread in the halls of
the United Nations, there are still those who stand up
for the values of freedom and security. I thank those
members for their moral clarity in such dark times.
To those who voted against the draft resolution,
I must say that their decision shocks me to the core. In
Israel we are fighting for our very survival. My elderly

25/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9453
23-32023 11/12
parents living in Ashkelon have spent the past 20 days
running back and forth to bomb shelters as rockets rain
down on them — deliberately on them, on civilians. Are
those members unable to condemn even deliberate attacks
on civilians perpetrated by terror organizations? If any
of their countries were subjected to a similar massacre,
I am certain that they would act with much greater
force — much greater force — than Israel. There would
be no question in their minds that such barbaric slaughter
would require a broad military operation against the
terrorists who committed such inhumane atrocities — an
operation to eradicate their terrorism capabilities in order
to make sure that such atrocities can never happen again.
How would Moscow react if terrorist death squads
wiped out entire neighbourhoods in Moscow? How
would Beijing respond if genocidal jihadists beheaded
and murdered its babies? I will give them a moment to
reflect on that thought. However, I believe that every
person — not only here in this Chamber but across the
globe, whoever is watching this discussion — knows
exactly how it would respond, so we do not need a moment
to reflect. Were the Security Council not to condemn the
terrorists and their crimes against its members’ innocent
civilians, each of them would be just as shaken as I am.
They would feel that there is a blatant double standard,
that the international community is blind to their agony,
and that the Council is not taking even the most basic
steps that anyone with a slight moral compass should take.
That is precisely how the State of Israel feels right now.
Those who voted against the United States-led
draft resolution (S/2023/792) have shown the world that
the Council is incapable of doing the most basic task of
condemning Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)-
like terrorists and that it cannot affirm the right to self-
defence of the victim of those heinous crimes. Israel
has been attacked and continues to be attacked. That
is a fact. In the south by Hamas and in the north by
Hizbullah — what a surprise.
Meanwhile, the other draft resolution, the Russian
draft resolution voted upon today (S/2023/795), sought
to tie Israel’s hands, preventing us from eliminating a
threat to our existence and permitting the genocidal
terrorists to regroup so that they can massacre us again.
The absurdity of calling on Israel to rescind the call for
a temporary evacuation is truly unbelievable and goes
against every value that the Council represents. By
demanding that Israel call on Gazans to return north,
that draft resolution would serve only to maximize
civilian casualties and not to mitigate them. Why would
Israel ask Gazans to return to an active war zone?
We cherish life and take every measure to minimize
civilian fatalities and casualties. We are not fighting
the Palestinians. We are fighting only the Hamas
ISIS terrorists. Civilians should never be deliberately
put in harm’s way. Furthermore, the alternative draft
resolution, the Russian draft resolution (S/2023/795),
makes no mention of our right to self-defence and no
mention of Hizbullah, the terrorist force on Israel’s
northern border that has spent the past weeks firing
rockets, mortars and anti-tank missiles at Israeli towns
and cities for no reason. Would Moscow or Beijing be
given a right to self-defence if faced with the same
threat? I believe so.
Finally, if this other draft resolution (S/2023/795)
truly focused on the humanitarian situation — as
it was presented the first time — the more than 220
hostages being held by Hamas would not appear as a
general sidenote at the very end of the draft resolution;
instead, their release would be the first demand. The
hostages held by Hamas must be the top humanitarian
priority of the international community. Their well-
being should come before aiding the supporters of the
terrorists who abducted them. Despite the wording
of the draft resolution submitted by Russia, there can
never be any false immoral comparisons between the
Hamas savages and the law-abiding democracy of
Israel. Israel is fighting sheer evil, and that should be
crystal clear to every person in this Chamber. Hamas
has perpetrated the most barbaric massacre of Jews
since the Holocaust. Hamas is solely responsible for the
Palestinians’ situation in Gaza. Hamas is committing
crimes against humanity. In the wake of the Holocaust,
we collectively swore — never again. That was one of
the main reasons the United Nations was established.
Never again is now — we must not forget that.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to say a few words in response to
what has just been said by the Permanent Representative
of Israel. The Permanent Representative of Israel
posed a rhetorical question: what would Moscow do if
there were terrorist attacks on the Russian Federation?
The response to that question is very clear. Russia has
encountered international terrorism in the past, for
example, during the events in Chechnya at the end of the
1990s and 2000s. At that time, many people sitting here
in this Chamber told us that we were not dealing with

S/PV.9453 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 25/10/2023
12/12 23-32023
international terrorism but with a national liberation
movement, and they urged us to talk to the Chechens.
We talked to the Chechens later. But we did not talk to
the terrorists, we destroyed them. We were also targeted
in terrorist attacks during the Budyonnovsk campaign,
when the terrorists occupied a hospital; in Dubrovka,
where they took over a cinema; in a school in Beslan,
where they killed a huge number of innocent children.
I would like to draw the Permanent Representative
of Israel’s attention to the fact that our statements
and our draft resolutions contain a condemnation of
terrorism and expressions of sympathy with the rightful
rage of Israel regarding the deaths of its civilians. We
are currently being confronted with terrorist acts as
well, and we do not talk to terrorists. We talked to the
Chechens, and as a result Chechnya is now a peaceful
Russian Republic that is an integral part of the Russian
Federation; indeed, the Chechens participate in Russia’s
special military operation and fully support the Russian
Government. That is what it means to talk to the people,
but we did not talk to the Chechen terrorists. We are not
asking Israel to reject a fight with terrorism but rather
to fight terrorists and not civilians. That is what we
mean, and we are not in any way denying Israel’s right
to protect itself from terrorist attacks. I ask Israel to
please bear that in mind when deciding to comment on
our statements in future.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I will be
brief. I would like to say to the Permanent Representative
of Israel only that it was not my intention to have a
debate with Israel, and that Israel, in treating China as
a rival, may have picked the wrong target. He should be
aware that from the very start of this round of conflict
between Palestine and Israel, China has unequivocally
condemned all acts that harm civilians in violation
of international law. When we refer to civilians, they
include both Palestinian and Israeli civilians.
The Permanent Representative of Israel made
some comments regarding today’s draft resolutions
(S/2023/792 and S/2023/795). I would like to remind
him that just last week, there was a draft resolution
before the Council (S/2023/773) that contained
elements condemning Hamas attacks. China voted in
favour of that draft resolution. However, it was vetoed
(see S/PV. 9442).
In my earlier statement, I made it abundantly clear
that China is absolutely not denying Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. However, we emphasize the need to
pay equal attention to the legitimate security concerns
and the legitimate rights of both Palestine and Israel.
In the current circumstances, while trying to deal
appropriately with this round of the conflict between
Palestine and Israel, we cannot deny that the Palestinian
people’s rights have not been properly guaranteed for a
very long time, and we believe that root cause of the
conflict lies in the fact that the issue of a two-State
solution has not been properly settled. Therefore, I
hope that we will all be honest, respect the facts, uphold
justice and join forces to tackle the current issues
effectively and chart a path whereby both Palestinians
and Israelis can live in harmony, tranquillity, peace
and happiness.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
