(2)
the following entries are added to the list of natural or legal persons, entities or bodies under the heading ‘B. Legal persons, entities and bodies’:
Names (Transliteration into Latin script)
Names
Identifying information
Reasons for listing
Date of listing
‘38.
Amana
a.k.a. Amana – Cooperative Society for Community Settlement Ltd
אמנה
(Hebrew spelling)
Address: Clermont-Ganneau St. 13, Jerusalem
Website: https://amana.co.il/
Date of registration: 18.2.1979
Registration number: 570025742
Amana is the cooperative development company and settlement movement of the movement Gush Emunim. Since its creation, it has played a key role in initiating, financing and facilitating at least 30 violent outposts and settlements, including outposts founded by individuals listed by the European Union (Yinon Levi, founder of the Mitarim Farm Outpost; Moshe Sharvit, founder of the Tirza Valley Farm Outpost / Moshe’s Farm; and Isaschar Manne, founder of the Manne Farm outpost) in the occupied West Bank. Along with settler violence emanating from them, including against human rights defenders, these outposts led to the widespread displacement of vulnerable Palestinian communities and dispossession of Palestinian properties. Amana’s major involvement in these illegal violent outposts includes facilitating land acquisition, constructing and marketing houses, initiating and preparing settlements masterplans and funding infrastructure. On various occasions, the organisation and its management have clearly stated their objective of dispossessing Palestinian communities.
Therefore, Amana is responsible for facilitating and encouraging human rights abuses in the West Bank, including abuses of the right to property of Palestinians and their right to self-determination, which are of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
28.5.2026
39.
Nachala Movement
נחלה
(Hebrew spelling)
Address: West Bank, occupied Palestinian territories
Website: https://www.nachalaisrael.org/
The Nachala Movement (“Nachala”) has the aim of promoting Jewish settlements and illegal outposts in the West Bank. Through its activities, the movement plays an instrumental role in facilitating and encouraging coercive acts that lead to the forced displacement of Palestinians and violate their right to property, their right to private and family life and their right to self-determination, as well as the right to life and to physical integrity. Nachala’s outposts, such as Evyatar, Maoz Esther, Oz Zion, Ramat Migron, Nachalat Zvi and Haeitam Farm, have been persistent sources of settler violence. Several of these Nachala outposts, including Yahish Zion, Maoz Esther, Oz Zion and Ramat Migron, were built on privately owned Palestinian land. All of Nachala’s outposts obstruct access to Palestinian agricultural and grazing land.
After 7 October 2023, Nachala has furthermore been at the forefront of efforts to resettle the Gaza Strip. Therefore, Nachala is responsible for facilitating and encouraging human rights abuses in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, including abuses of the right of Palestinians to self-determination, their right to property, their right to private and family life, as well as the right to life and to physical health, which are of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
28.5.2026
40.
Regavim
a.k.a. Regavim Movement
רגבים
(Hebrew spelling)
Address: Rehovot, Mo’din, Jerusalem, Haifa, Maale Adumin, Ariel, Tel Aviv District, Efrat, Bersheeba
Website: https://www.regavim.org/
Place of registration: Sha’ar Binyamin
PO BOX 44439, Jerusalem, Israel, 9144302
Regavim is an Israeli NGO with an active pro-Israeli settler and settlement expansion agenda in the West Bank. Regavim institutes legal proceedings and lobbies for the demolition of Palestinian property with the aim of expanding the control of Israel to the whole West Bank. Through its activities Regavim plays an instrumental role in facilitating and encouraging coercive acts that aim to destroy Palestinian property and demolish Palestinian homes, leading to forced displacement of Palestinians.
Regavim is responsible for multiple court proceedings, and lobbied, for the demolition of a Palestinian primary school, funded by the European Union, at the Jabbet al Dhib village, near Bethlehem, in the West Bank in May 2023.
Therefore, Regavim is responsible for facilitating and encouraging human rights abuses in the West Bank, including violations of the right to property, the right to private and family life and their right to self-determination, and the right to education of Palestinians, as well as the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental integrity, which are of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
28.5.2026
41.
Hashomer Yosh
a.k.a. Guardians of Judea and Samaria, Guardians of Yehuda and the Shomron, Hashomer Judea and Samaria, Hashomer Yehudah V’Shomron
השומר יו״ש
(Hebrew spelling)
Address: Esh Kodesh 2, Shilo, 4483000
West Bank, occupied Palestinian territories
Website: https://hashomeryosh.org/home-en/
Date of registration: 18.6.2013
Registration number: 580575629
Hashomer Yosh is an Israeli NGO that provides material support and coordinates volunteers for farm work on herding farms, supporting at least 28 violent outposts and settlements in the West Bank by recruiting armed volunteers and providing guards involved in violent attacks. In particular, Hashomer Yosh is supporting outposts founded by individuals listed by the European Union: Neria Ben Pazi, founder of the Rimonim Farm Outpost; Zvi Bar Yosef, founder of Zvi’s Farm; Yinon Levi, founder of the Mitarim Farm; and Moshe Sharvit, founder of the Tirza Valley Farm Outpost / Moshe’s Farm.
Therefore, Hashomer Yosh is responsible for facilitating and encouraging human rights abuses in the West Bank, including abuses of the right to property of Palestinians and their right to self-determination, and the right to physical and mental integrity, which are of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
28.5.2026’
