The agenda includes the current state and future prospects of bilateral ties in trade and the economy, cultural and humanitarian affairs, as well as the situation in the Middle East, emphasising the state of affairs in the Gaza Strip.
Taking part in the talks on the Russian side were Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov Lavrov SergeiMinister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation , Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office and Presidential Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov Peskov DmitryDeputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office, Presidential Press Secretary , Presidential Aide Yury Ushakov Ushakov YuryAide to the President , Minister of Labour and Social Protection and Chairman of the Russian Part of the Intergovernmental Russian-Palestinian Commission on Trade and Economic Cooperation Anton Kotyakov Kotyakov AntonMinister of Labour and Social Protection of the Russian Federation , Central Bank Governor Elvira Nabiullina Nabiullina ElviraGovernor of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation (Bank of Russia) , and Chief of the Main Directorate of the General Staff and Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation Armed Forces Igor Kostyukov.
* * *
Beginning of Russian-Palestinian talks
President of Russia Vladimir Putin: Mr President, friends,
I am happy to see you. Welcome to Russia, to Moscow.
Relations between Russia and Palestine have deep roots and a special quality. Back in 1988, the Soviet Union recognised the Palestinian state, and we maintain the same position today.
Our approach to the issues of Palestine and to a settlement in the Middle East is principled and consistent. We believe that only the establishment and full functioning of the Palestinian state can lead to a lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict.
We remember your visit last year for the 80th anniversary of Victory in the Great Patriotic War, and we thank you for your participation.
I would like to note that our relations continue to develop today despite any challenges related to the situation in the region. Of course, in absolute figures, our trade remains rather modest, although a trend for increase is emerging. Our mutual trade has tripled recently.
We continue our humanitarian cooperation – in particular, we continue training workers for Palestine. This year, some 150 young Palestinians are studying and will continue to study in higher education institutions and other educational organisations in Russia.
Security certainly remains one of the vital topics. You know that, during the toughest times of the crisis in Gaza, we provided humanitarian aid – primarily at your request. We have sent over 800 tonnes of cargo to Gaza through around 32 humanitarian missions. At your request, we have sent wheat directly and via international organisations.
Of course, we will discuss the current developments in the Gaza Strip and Palestine in general, and on the Israeli-Palestinian track.
We will talk about the US President’s initiative to establish a new body that will mainly focus, judging from what we have seen, on settling the situation in Palestine, in Gaza.
You may have heard that we are willing to provide $1 billion to this new body, the Board of Peace, primarily to support the Palestinian people, assist in the restoration of the Gaza Strip, and address the general resolution of problems facing Palestine, as I have mentioned, from the funds that were frozen in the United States by the former administration. I believe this is possible. We discussed this option earlier with members of the US administration. A meeting and a conversation are scheduled today in Moscow on this matter.
Overall, we are delighted to continue our contacts. They take place at different levels, but we are pleased to see them continue at the top level as well.
We are glad to see you in Moscow. Welcome, Mr President.
President of the State of Palestine Mahmoud Abbas Abbas MahmoudPresident of the State of Palestine (retranslated): Mr President, thank you very much for this opportunity and for receiving us here in Moscow.
We are friends of Russia and the Russian people. For over 50 years, our nations have been bound by a strong friendship that has developed over the decades and continues on the correct path. Russia is a great friend and a nation upon which we rely in many spheres.
Historically, Russia has supported and stood by the Palestinian people at the political and diplomatic levels. Your economic and financial support is both significant in scale and crucial in importance.
You have referenced only a part of it, yet our people are deeply pleased and grateful to Russia for this aid, support, and for Russia’s unwavering stance in support of Palestine.
Mr President, as you well know, we have suffered greatly on our land under the Israeli occupation, which has led to destruction in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, and Jerusalem.
I would like to cite some statistics. The number of killed and wounded in the Gaza Strip has reached 260,000. There are also many thousands of wounded in the West Bank. The scale of destruction is catastrophic. The Gaza Strip has been almost entirely destroyed, with 85 percent of infrastructure – educational (schools, universities), religious sites (mosques, churches), and so forth – lying in ruins.
Nevertheless, I would like to assure you, Mr President, that the Palestinian people are holding onto their land, and we categorically oppose attempts by the Americans and Israelis to expatriate Palestinians beyond Palestinian territory. The Palestinian people are resolved that they will not abandon their land, whatever the cost.
We are now forced to live in tents. These tents are washed away by the rains, subjected to destruction, and the ground is eroded. Yet, we will not be displaced from our land.
What we need is peace, and we hope that with your help and support, we can achieve it – a peace built on the basis of international legal resolutions, decisions of the United Nations, and the principles established following the wars of 1967 and 1973.
East Jerusalem remains the capital of Palestine, and we know that Russia has always supported – indeed, was the first to support – Palestine, maintaining a firm stance in support of our people.
Mr President, we hope to discuss with you today our vision for the future and the details of the current situation. We are ready to work together with your support and assistance, and we hope to reach a solution.
Russia has been our friend for over five decades. Every time we visit your remarkable country – whether in summer or winter, in snow or rain – we feel that a part of our hearts is here, that we are bound by a spiritual connection. We regard Moscow as a second home. We are here among our friends.
Thank you, Mr President.
<…>
