Port Moresby, 2 March, 2026
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hon. Justin Tkatchenko, MP, today announced the temporary closure of Papua New Guinea Embassy in Jerusalem and all staff called to adhere to host country instructions to hunker down in bomb shelter following the State of Israel being an active War theatre in the Middle East.
Minister Tkatchenko in a statement said the conflict in the Middle East has escalated to where United States and Israel are in a full-scale war with Iran.
“As soon as we are able to extradite or evacuate our diplomatic personnel when border and airspace open PNG will relocate the operations of its embassy to the capital Port Moresby.”
“Also, we have the new embassy that we were establishing in United Arab Emirates, that will be put temporarily on halt, staff directed to remain in Port Moresby until the situation in the Middle East ease for business as usual.”
“We don’t want any of our citizen to be injured or hurt or distressed in a situation that we have no control over.”
“For us we will continue to work with our neighbor and partners to cosely monitor developments.”
Minister Tkatchenko said Jerusalem Embassy is very important and the establishment of UAE Embassy is even more important, especially for trade and economic benefit for PNG for the long term.
“We are liaising with all our missions and posts globally and identifying information from other countries to assess day to day development in Israel and the Middle East”
Minister Tkatchenko added that the Australian government and their Missions in Israel and UAE have also offered their assistance to any Papua New Guinea citizens that need help in this situation.
Department of Foreign Affairs Secretary Mr Elias Wohengu said at present it is difficult to carry out evacuation as all land borders and airspace are closed in West Asia, Middle East.
“It is a security risk to conduct evacuation. Governments of the region have issued humanitarian instructions to service providers to look after 3rd country nationals who are stranded.”
“Many governments have now issued instructions to their service providers to extend humanitarian assistance to all that are caught up until such time, they are free to leave the country.”
Mr Wohengu also added that citizens of PNG are not compelled by any law or regulations to inform Foreign Affairs of their travel overseas.
“We do not have any data or information on anyone who is caught stranded in any middle East country except for a couple in UAE.”
“If citizens know of anyone who is stranded, they are to immediately contact the protocol division of the department on phone 3014115 or email consular.affairs@dfa.gov.pg.”
Ends///
