Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9790
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9790th meeting
Wednesday, 20 November 2024, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bendjama
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fu Cong
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Montalvo Sosa
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamazaki
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sowa
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Blokar Drobič
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wood
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-35739 (E)
*2435739*

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
2/15 24-35739
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2024/835, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria, Ecuador, Guyana, Japan, Malta,
Mozambique, the Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone,
Slovenia and Switzerland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I thank you,
Madam President, for so swiftly facilitating the request
to convene this meeting.
I have the honour to introduce this draft resolution
(S/2024/835) on behalf of the 10 elected Member
States of the Security Council (E10), namely, Algeria,
Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, the Republic of
Korea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Switzerland and my
own country, Guyana.
The draft resolution before the Council is the
product of several weeks of consultations among all
Council members. It was prompted by the Council’s deep
concern over the catastrophic humanitarian situation
in Gaza, including what was unfolding in north Gaza,
and the need for an urgent response to that situation. I
take this opportunity to thank all delegations for their
very constructive stance throughout the negotiations.
Their flexibility allowed us to develop a text that we
feel responds to many critical elements of the conflict.
The text before us recalls the Security Council’s
primary responsibility to uphold international peace
and security, demands an immediate, unconditional and
permanent ceasefire to be respected by all parties and
reiterates the Council’s demand for the immediate and
unconditional release of all hostages. That is one of the
most important provisions of the text, since it addresses
some of the most fundamental concerns regarding the
ongoing hostilities. The text also demands that the
parties comply with their obligations on international
law, including international humanitarian law.
Emphasis is also placed on the last four resolutions
adopted by the Council in relation to this conflict,
reaffirming the provisions of those resolutions and
demanding, in particular, the full and unconditional
implementation of resolution 2735 (2024), adopted in
June.
Critically, the draft resolution also demands
immediate access by the civilian population in
the Gaza Strip to basic services and humanitarian
assistance indispensable to its survival. While rejecting
any effort to starve Palestinians, it also demands the
facilitation of the full, rapid, safe and unhindered entry
of humanitarian assistance at scale, to and throughout
the Gaza Strip, and the delivery of that assistance to
all Palestinian civilians who need it, including to
civilians in besieged north Gaza. The draft resolution
acknowledges the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as the
backbone of the humanitarian response in Gaza and
calls on all parties to enable the Agency to carry out its
mandate in all areas of operation.
The text represents the broad consensus achieved
on the basis of careful, inclusive and transparent
negotiations. While several divergent positions have
found a balance in the text, the dominant concern has
been to provide a legally binding obligation to end the
hostilities in Gaza. The E10 sincerely hopes that all
delegations will support the text, since it aligns with
our Charter of the United Nations responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 3/15
In favour:
Algeria, China, Ecuador, France, Guyana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Switzerland,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
None
The President: The draft resolution received 14
votes in favour, 1 against and no abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The United
States deeply regrets that the Security Council finds
itself here again. The United States worked for weeks
in good faith to avoid this outcome. We made clear
throughout the negotiations that we could not support
an unconditional ceasefire that failed to release the
hostages because, as the Council has previously called
for, a durable end to the war must come with the release
of the hostages. Those two urgent goals are inextricably
linked. This draft resolution (S/2024/835) abandoned
that necessity, and for that reason the United States
could not support it. Simply put, this draft resolution
would have sent a dangerous message to Hamas:
that there is no need to come back to the negotiating
table. Hamas would have seen it as a vindication of its
cynical strategy to hope and pray that the international
community forgets about the fate of more than 100
hostages from more than 20 Member States who have
been held for 410 days. We must not let that happen,
ever.
Let me say it clearly, there are still seven American
citizens in the hands of Hamas — we will not forget
them. For our part, we will continue to pursue a
diplomatic solution that brings peace, security and
freedom to Palestinians in Gaza. The United States,
along with partners in the region, has worked tirelessly
to achieve such a deal, but we are not there yet. Why?
Because Hamas has rejected deal after deal after deal.
And yet some members of the Council, in their public
statements, ignore the callous intransigence of Hamas
and indeed refuse to condemn Hamas, which, I note,
this draft resolution failed to do, again. Some members
of the Council do not seem to want to confront the
reality that, today, it is not Israel standing in the way of
a ceasefire and a hostage deal, it is Hamas. Israel has
said that it is prepared to have a temporary ceasefire
in exchange for the release of a few hostages and then
build on that to bring each and every hostage home.
The messages we send to the world through
these resolutions matter, and this draft resolution had
several other problems. Among the most glaring, as
I have already mentioned, is the failure to condemn
Hamas for its terrorist attack of 7 October 2023. It is
inexplicable that, more than 13 months since that day,
some members of the Council are missing the plot,
refusing to acknowledge that it is Hamas that instigated
this conflict and that it is Hamas that has put millions
of Palestinian civilians in harm’s way and has brought
the region to the precipice of a broader war.
We have been clear that it is time for this war to
end, for the hostages to be released and for Palestinian
civilians to begin to rebuild their lives. More
immediately, the United States has been explicitly
clear to Israel that it has a responsibility to facilitate
humanitarian access and the delivery of aid at scale.
We believe that the process of laying out the terms
of what we expect from Israel in a very detailed way
has generated a change in Israel’s approach. American
diplomacy will continue to press for more aid in and
throughout Gaza, which requires a sustained, expanded
implementation of urgent steps to improve conditions
on the ground.
We regret that the Council could have incorporated
compromised language put forward by the United
Kingdom to bridge the existing gaps and support those
humanitarian steps. With that language, this draft
resolution should have been adopted, and the Council
would have reinforced ongoing diplomatic efforts on
the ground. Indeed, we have also put forward many
formulations over the past few weeks that could have
bridged the gaps and seen the Council speak with one
voice. Despite those proposals from the United States
throughout the process, many on the Council did not
engage seriously on their merits and rather continued
to seek a path of discord. In fact, we heard that some
desired a United States veto rather than a consensus
product. That is cynical and unfortunate.
This is not how the process should work. Despite the
failure of the Council to reach consensus — and again,

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
4/15 24-35739
I think there was a path available to do so — the United
States will keep working to improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground, which, as we have said before,
requires unhindered access and sustained humanitarian
aid flowing into Gaza and reaching all those in need.
In conclusion, let me just note that the United States
has taken a very clear position since this war began,
which is that Israel had a right to defend itself after
the worst slaughter of Jews since the Holocaust. The
United States has also, over the course of the past year,
done more than any other country to take tangible steps
to improve the humanitarian conditions in Gaza, even
as the situation remains dire. We have also done more
than anyone to work with the Government of Israel in
an effort to minimize civilian harm over the course of
the conflict, and we continue to emphasize to Israel that
more must be done to save lives. The United States also
continued to work with partners in the region to support
a revitalized Palestinian Authority that can assume
responsibility for governing Gaza and the West Bank.
We have encouraged regional integration efforts that
would strengthen regional stability and marginalize
sources of instability, and we have never wavered in our
support for a two-State solution. It is vital that we end
this war in a way that charts a path forward in the post-
conflict period that provides governance, security and
reconstruction in Gaza and restores dignity for civilians
caught in the middle of a war they did not want. We must
work towards a future in which Israelis and Palestinians
can live side by side, within two democratic States, and
enjoy equal measures of security, dignity and freedom,
and in which Israel is secure within its own borders.
An unconditional ceasefire with Hamas means
the Council accepts Hamas retaining power in Gaza.
The United States will never accept that. Rather than
adopting a draft resolution that emboldens Hamas, let
us instead demand that Hamas implement resolution
2735 (2024) without further condition or delay. Let
us continue to ensure that Israel facilitates additional
humanitarian aid into Gaza, and let us work to bring
a durable end to the suffering and misery of Hamas’s
many victims since 7 October 2023. The draft resolution
sent the wrong message to the parties, but our actions
and diplomacy on the ground will continue to push
them in a more positive direction. We invite others on
the Council to join us.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): The draft resolution that we
had in front of us today (S/2024/835) is the result of a
common conviction by the 10 elected members of the
Security Council that the Council can no longer stand idle
in the face of such uncontrolled violence, disregard for
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and a human-made humanitarian catastrophe. We
sincerely thank Guyana for diligently coordinating the
initiative. Let us be clear: the text we had in front of us
today was by no means a maximalist one. It represented
the bare minimum of what is needed to begin to address
the desperate situation on the ground. It was a genuine
effort to bring the Council to speak with one voice on
a conflict that risks dragging the entire region over the
precipice. It is deeply regrettable that, owing to the use
of the veto, the Council has once again failed to uphold
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security.
As the region continues to descend into further
violence, civilians across all sides continue to endure
unimaginable suffering. In north Gaza, hungry
Palestinian mothers trudge through a destroyed
landscape, seeking food and medicine for their
malnourished children, while air strikes and hostilities
continue to decimate their land and people. Innocent
civilians have been held hostage in squalor by Hamas
and other armed groups for more than a year. Lebanese
and Israeli families along both sides of the Blue Line
and beyond have been forcibly displaced from their
homes and communities in an effort to seek safety.
Those are the consequences of the ongoing failure to
secure a peaceful solution to this conflict.
The draft resolution would have finally made a
clear demand for an immediate, unconditional and
permanent ceasefire in Gaza. It would have demanded
that the humanitarian needs of Palestinians in Gaza
be urgently met, including for civilians in besieged
northern Gaza. It would have demanded the immediate
and unconditional release of hostages. It would also
have sought to call on all parties to enable the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to carry out its mandate, as
adopted by the General Assembly, in the face of grave
threats emanating from the recently adopted legislation
in Israel.
Faced with the Council’s failure to adopt a resolution
that clearly speaks to those demands, Malta stresses
that the parties to the conflict are fully obligated
to comply with and immediately and effectively
implement the relevant existing Council resolutions
and the orders of the International Court of Justice. We
unequivocally stress that international law, including

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 5/15
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, must be respected by all parties.
Despite our disappointment with the result of today’s
vote, we must not give up. On the contrary, we must
redouble our efforts to keep pushing for an immediate
and permanent ceasefire in Gaza. The time has come to
bring an end to this extraordinary suffering, to restore
hope and to give peace a chance — a peace based on a
two-State solution, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the internationally agreed parameters.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): At the outset, I extend
my gratitude to those who voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by the 10 elected members
of the Security Council (S/2024/835), which are the
representatives of the collective will of the international
community.
It is a sad day for the Security Council, for the
United Nations and for the international community
as a whole. The draft resolution that the Council failed
to adopt today sought only to break its deafening
silence of five months after the adoption of resolution
2735 (2024) — five months during which the Security
Council remained idle, its hands tied.
This text was far from ideal, but it represented the
bare minimum that should have united us. Algeria,
my country, has consistently called for enforcing
Security Council decisions and imposing sanctions on
those who defy the collective will of the international
community. For that reason, our position was to adopt
a draft resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. There were significant concession
during negotiations. Yet one member chose to block
any action by the Council.
Today’s message is clear: first, the message
sent to the Israeli occupying Power is that it may
continue its genocide and its collective punishment
of the Palestinian people with complete impunity. In
this Chamber, it enjoys immunity. To the Palestinian
people, another clear message is being sent: while the
overwhelming majority of the world stands in solidarity
with their plight, tragically, others remain indifferent to
their suffering.
We must ask ourselves today, as human beings: is
it not enough that 44,000 Palestinians have been killed
in Gaza, 70 per cent of whom are women and children?
How many more must perish before the Council
imposes a ceasefire? Is it not enough that the number
of orphans in Gaza now ranges from 17,000 to 18,000,
many of whom have no surviving family members to
care for them? Gaza, once known as a city of children,
has tragically become a city of orphans. How many
more children must be orphaned before the Council
takes action? Is it not enough that more than 170
journalists have been killed in Gaza? And how many
more journalists must die before the Council acts?
Israel, the occupying Power, has killed more
journalists in one year than those lost in the Second
World War and the Viet Nam War combined. Where
are those who proclaim to be defenders of human rights
and freedom of expression? Why are they silent in the
face of such atrocities? Is it not enough that at least
326 aid workers — the highest number ever recorded
in history — have been killed? How many more must
sacrifice their lives before the Council decides to
impose sanctions? Is it not enough that more than 1,000
health workers have been killed? How many more must
fall before the Council takes decisive action? Is it not
enough that almost the entire population of Gaza has
been forcibly displaced and now faces famine, with
some already succumbing to starvation? How many
more must starve to death before the Council responds?
Over the past year, the Council has adopted four
resolutions. Negotiations were conducted. Calls from
every corner of the globe were made. Yet nothing
has stopped the Israeli killing machine in Gaza, and
the reason is painfully clear: Israeli leaders operate
with full knowledge that they enjoy impunity. They
enjoy immunity. They are certain that the Security
Council, tasked with maintaining international peace
and security under the Charter of the United Nations,
will be prevented from acting to halt the genocide.
Today we have missed an opportunity. This failure will
have devastating consequences for the international
order. But rest assured that this will not be the last
time. The Security Council will be forced to adopt
a draft resolution on Palestine. As we have said
before — and as we have delivered — we will soon
return to the Security Council to demand an immediate,
unconditional and permanent ceasefire in Gaza, with
even firmer language, under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. And our efforts will not cease until the
Council takes decisive action.
Mr. Fu Cong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is very disappointed with the result of today’s voting.
Guyana, Algeria and the other elected members of the
Council demonstrated a maximum amount of sincerity
and constructiveness during the consultations on the

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
6/15 24-35739
draft resolution (S/2024/835). The United States veto
alone has dashed the hopes of the people of Gaza for
survival, pushing them further into darkness and
desperation. I said during the Council’s debate on
Monday (see S/PV.9787) that every moment will be
recorded and will be judged by history. We cannot
imagine how the voting today, as well as the Security
Council’s failure to respond to the Gaza conflict over
the past 13 months, will escape the harsh judgment of
history.
In the future, when looking back, people will find it
hard to believe what happened. When the United States
cast its first veto, on 18 October 2023 (see S/PV.9442),
almost 3,000 civilians had been killed in Gaza. By
the time the United States cast its second veto (see
S/PV.9499), 17,000 people had been killed as a result of
Israel’s bombing. With each veto, the death toll in Gaza
has continued to rise. When the United States exercised
its right to the veto for the fifth time, on 18 April 2024
(see S/PV.9609), the death toll in Gaza stood at 34,000
people. Now that nearly 44,000 people have been
killed in Gaza, the United States nevertheless did not
hesitate in its use of the veto; 44,000 is not some cold
statistic. It could include a child, a nursing mother or
the breadwinner of a family. The loss of each one of
them means visceral pain for the surviving relatives.
People cannot help but ask: do Palestinian lives
mean nothing? With the death count at 44,000 people,
is there even a little bit of sympathy from the United
States? How many more people must die before they
wake up from their feigned slumber. In the future, when
looking back, people will find it hard to understand
what happened. The Security Council is mandated
under the Charter of the United Nations to shoulder the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is incomprehensible why, for the
past year, the United States has been so insistent on
rendering the Council unable to play its role, leading to
its paralysis. The United States claims to be conducting
parallel diplomatic efforts and has repeatedly promised
that progress would soon be made in the negotiations.
It is incomprehensible, then, why to date the so-called
diplomatic negotiations have seen no progress. Why is
Israel allowed to continue its military operations while
consistently setting new conditions for negotiations? In
the future, when looking back, people will inevitably
feel indignant. Israel has flagrantly breached every red
line of international humanitarian law, with its actions
causing an unprecedented humanitarian disaster.
But even as famine is imminent in Gaza, the United
States always seems to be able to find a justification to
defend Israel. That represents a distortion and selective
application of international humanitarian law. People
continue to learn how extreme double standards can
be and how low one can stoop. It is no wonder that
people feel angry. People’s indignation also stems from
the fact that the continued supply of weapons from
the United States has become a decisive factor in the
war’s protraction, causing many casualties and much
destruction.
The United States representative called earlier in
his statement for the release of hostages. Our position
has been very clear from the beginning: all hostages
must be released, and an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire must be established. Both are important
factors. There should be no conditions. They cannot be
linked to one another. Facts have shown that Israel’s
military operations in Gaza have long exceeded the
mission of rescuing the hostages. Any insistence on
setting a precondition for a ceasefire is tantamount to
giving a green light to continue the war and condoning
the continued killing.
The repeated use of the veto by the United States
has reduced the authority of the Security Council and
international law to an all-time low, but it is never too
late to recognize the mistakes made and take corrective
actions. We call on the United States to take seriously
its responsibilities as a permanent member of the
Council. The United States should stop being passive
and evasive and deliberately procrastinating. The
United States should show a sense of responsibility and
support the Council in taking all the necessary actions
to achieve a ceasefire, save lives and restore peace.
Mrs. Blokar Drobič (Slovenia): Slovenia voted in
favour of the draft resolution (S/2024/835), focusing
on the demand for an immediate, unconditional and
permanent ceasefire.
We thank Guyana, the coordinator, for its able
steering of the efforts of the 10 elected members of the
Security Council (E10), and we thank the other E10
members for their excellent cooperation in presenting
the draft resolution.
Since the start of the war in Gaza more than a
year ago, Slovenia has been continuously calling for
a strong, united voice from the Council on this issue.
We have been supportive of every effort to find that
unified response. It is indisputable that the Council is

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 7/15
the primary body entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is the responsibility
of every Member State to contribute. As an elected
member, our sense of responsibility has been growing.
The war has brought pain and destruction,
confrontations and shockwaves, restrictions and attacks
on the United Nations and violations of international law.
From the terrorist attack of Hamas on 7 October 2023
to the relentless attacks on civilians and restrictions on
humanitarian assistance in Gaza, including the siege
of northern Gaza and unprecedented obstructions of
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East operations, the war represents
everything that the Charter of the United Nations
stands against. We regret that the veto was cast, all the
more so since the war, with its humanitarian impact
and spillover effect, amounts to a serious threat to
international peace and security.
We deeply appreciate the work done by Egypt,
Qatar and the United States aimed at reaching a
ceasefire deal on the ground. As we clearly stated at the
adoption of resolution 2735 (2024) (see S/PV.9650), we
believe that calls by the international community and
efforts by mediators and those of a bilateral nature are
intertwined and should be mutually reinforcing.
The suffering in Gaza must end. The suffering
of people in Palestine, Israel, Lebanon and in the
wider region must end. There must be an immediate,
unconditional and permanent ceasefire. Hostages must
be released. Humanitarian aid must be scaled up. We
have heard countless briefings making it crystal clear:
we must act now. It is the Council’s responsibility to react
to threats to international peace and security. There is
an entire generation of children in Gaza whom we are
failing. They lost their families, communities, schools,
friends and childhood. This is a war the Council can
and must stop with a united and unequivocal demand
for a ceasefire. That is the first step towards achieving
a comprehensive solution to the conflict, a first step
towards giving those children a future.
Slovenia will support further steps to peace,
including an international peace conference and a
commitment to a global alliance for the implementation
of the two-State solution, so that future generations
in Israel and Palestine can live side by side in peace,
security and prosperity.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks the elected members of the Security Council for
preparing the draft resolution (S/2024/835). It finds it
deeply regrettable that the draft resolution could not be
adopted today.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
catastrophic and continues to deteriorate. International
humanitarian law is being trampled upon. Under the
circumstances, the only response would have been, and
remains, an immediate and permanent ceasefire. The
delivery of humanitarian aid must be commensurate
with needs, particularly in the north of the enclave,
where famine looms.
All the hostages must be released immediately
and unconditionally. The draft resolution made that
specific demand in no uncertain terms. France, which
still has two hostages in Gaza, deplores the fact that
the Security Council was incapable of making that
demand. France has not stopped, and nor will it stop,
condemning the terrorist attacks of 7 October 2023.
The Security Council must follow suit and do so
unequivocally. The Council must also work towards
the concrete implementation of the two-State solution
on the basis of the agreed parameters. There must be
security guarantees for the Israelis. We must also work
towards the establishment of an independent, viable
and contiguous State for the Palestinians. France will
continue to strive towards those goals.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to explain that Ecuador voted in favour
of the draft resolution that we have just considered
(S/2024/835), a resolution of which Ecuador is a
co-drafter, along with the other elected members,
because it shares the sense of urgency for the Security
Council to act, once again, to stop the war, free the
hostages still being held by Hamas and address the
catastrophic humanitarian situation of the civilian
population in Gaza, which is on the brink of famine.
For the second time this year, the 10 elected
members of the Security Council (E10) took on the
challenge of drafting a text that would be agreeable
to all Council members and would allow the Council
to fulfil its responsibility in the face of a pressing
situation. The draft resolution is the fruit of a long
negotiation process, in which all Council members took
part and which Guyana coordinated with skill and tact.
I am grateful to their delegation.
The text we have considered in the Council calls for
an immediate ceasefire, the release of the hostages and
urgent humanitarian access for the civilian population.

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
8/15 24-35739
Those demands are shared by an overwhelming
majority of the States Members of the United Nations.
Other requirements of great urgency and importance
were also included in the draft resolution, such as
the need to implement existing resolutions adopted in
recent months and to abide by the rules of international
humanitarian law. The text also contains a condemnation
of all terrorist acts, which implicitly includes those
committed by Hamas on 7 October 2023 and the taking
of hostages. My country, once again, deplores those
unconscionable acts, which are the direct cause of the
war that has ravaged Gaza ever since.
In such a complex situation, a text that is perfect
in everyone’s eyes is impossible. Ecuador, for example,
would prefer to adopt a draft resolution containing an
explicit condemnation of the 7 October 2023 terrorist
attacks. That notwithstanding, the 14 votes in favour of
the draft resolution make it clear that the draft that the
E10 put before the Council for consideration is balanced
and timely. It is regrettable that it was not adopted
because one permanent member voted against it.
Mr. Sowa (Sierra Leone): We thank Guyana, the
coordinator of the 10 elected members of the Security
Council (E10) in relation to the draft resolution on the
situation in Gaza (S/2024/835), for its commendable
and tireless efforts in facilitating the negotiations. We
thank all Council members for their engagement and
flexibility in the negotiations.
Sierra Leone voted in favour of the E10 draft
resolution on the situation in Gaza in order to have
a ceasefire and, more importantly, to save lives. We
therefore deeply regret that the draft resolution was not
adopted, even though 14 members of the Council, an
overwhelming majority, voted for its adoption.
Thirteen months into the conflict in the Gaza Strip,
with more than 43,500 deaths, hundreds of thousands
injured, approximately 1.7 million internally displaced
persons and women, children and young people
bearing the brunt of the conflict, it is long overdue for
the Security Council, as guided by the Charter of the
United Nations, to take an appropriate step to end the
carnage in the Gaza Strip.
While we recognize the tireless efforts displayed
by the Council in adopting four resolutions thus
far — namely, resolutions 2712 (2023), 2720 (2023),
2728 (2024) and 2735 (2024) — it is regrettable that the
parties to the conflict have failed to fully comply with
their respective provisions.
The adoption of resolution 2735 (2024) on 10 June had
ushered in renewed optimism that, through diplomatic
efforts, a deal could be agreed upon that would achieve
a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas, ensure the
release of hostages, guarantee the effective distribution
of humanitarian assistance at scale throughout the Gaza
Strip, establish the framework for the reconstruction of
Gaza and commence the process for the actualization
of the two-State solution. Unfortunately, that process
has been slow, without any tangible progress, and every
day that elapses, we witness more deaths and suffering.
For that reason and in the light of the many horrific
humanitarian and security reports and briefings on
the situation in the Gaza Strip, Sierra Leone joined
the E10 initiative to have a text that clearly demands
an immediate and unconditional ceasefire and the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages.
The text further called for compliance with
obligations under international law and for access
by the civilian population in the Gaza Strip to basic
services and humanitarian assistance indispensable
for their survival, while acknowledging the role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in facilitating and distributing
aids to civilians. The adoption of this text could have
compelled the parties to the conflict to fulfil their
legal, political, moral and humanitarian obligations
to civilians in the Gaza Strip and the hostages held by
Hamas since 7 October 2023. It could have been the
path to justice and an enforcement of accountability.
It would have allowed the Council the opportunity to
affirm its role and unite in strength to save humankind
from destruction.
Nevertheless, we will not despair: Sierra Leone
remains committed to supporting any credible and
serious political and diplomatic efforts that will finally
address the protracted conflict.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Guyana and the other elected
members of the Council for the courage they have
demonstrated and their efforts in promoting the draft
resolution that was put to the vote today (S/2024/835).
We supported the document, and we commend those
responsible members of the Council who, like us,
understand the need for an early and unconditional
ceasefire in Gaza as a key to overall stabilization in
the region.

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 9/15
I would now ask my colleagues to listen carefully
to the following part of my statement. Once I have
concluded, I shall explain why.
We are shocked that the United States has vetoed
an effort to save Palestinian and Israeli lives. However,
we should perhaps not be surprised. For months, the
United States has obstructed and obfuscated, standing
in the way of Council action aimed at addressing the
catastrophic situation in Gaza and pandering to one side
of the conflict to advance its own political objectives
at the expense of Palestinian lives. Today the Council
would have come together to call for a comprehensive
ceasefire, the protection of civilians and a solution to
the whole complex of humanitarian problems facing
the Palestinians. The United States claims that it stands
with and for the Palestinian people, yet it vetoed a draft
resolution supported by the vast majority of countries
in the region and in the region’s interests. We would
have demanded today that there be an immediate,
unconditional and permanent ceasefire in Gaza, as
well as the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages. It is unconscionable that the United States
would cynically stand in the way of demands for those
actions, which could save lives in the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis.
We do not need to be lectured by the United States
on hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is what the United States
exhibits on a daily basis in the context of multiple
conflicts, trampling on the sovereignty of States,
brazenly interfering in their internal affairs and
imposing its own rules. As a result, tens of thousands
of civilians have been killed. We are closely monitoring
the situation and will continue to call out abuses and
those responsible, in particular the United States. We
have an obligation to continue to amplify the voices
of the Palestinian people, who are calling for peace,
prosperity and justice. The United States cannot stand
in the way of that.
I hope members have realized that the above was an
almost a verbatim quoting of yesterday’s statement by
the Permanent Representative of the United States (see
S/PV.9786) in explanation of vote on the draft resolution
on the Sudan (S/2024/826). In our view, the quote is
very appropriate. We wish to thank our American
colleagues for sparing us from having to prepare most
of our statement in explanation of vote thanks to their
statement yesterday.
I shall now turn to address my American colleagues.
Today the United States has definitively shown
that it is fully responsibility for the death of tens of
thousands of innocent civilians, the deprivation of
refugees and the suffering of hostages and illegally
detained Palestinians. It was interesting to listen to the
American representative’s statement today following
the vote. He argued, for example, that the draft
resolution did not contain a provision on the release of
hostages, yet it does contain such a provision. Perhaps
the American representative should have read the draft
resolution before voting against it. He also claimed that
the draft resolution did not contain a condemnation of
the attacks of 7 October. I would like to remind our
American colleagues that it was the United States that
vetoed a Security Council draft resolution condemning
the 7 October 2023 attacks (S/2023/773) on 18 October
2023 (see S/PV.9442).
The United States presents itself as a key partner,
not only of Israel but also of the States of the Arab
world, yet it voted against a draft resolution that is in
the interests of all Arabs and supported by the Arabs
themselves. By adopting the draft document, we could
have demanded that Israel cease its deadly attacks
in Gaza and the West Bank and curb its continued
aggression against Lebanon and Syria. We could have
sent a clear message to the parties to put an end to the
violence and move towards a political and diplomatic
settlement of the Palestinian question.
The callous and cynical obstruction by the United
States of a simple demand by the Security Council to
save human lives is an unconscionable and inhumane
act. We have no doubt that the Israelis themselves
have an interest in ending the spiral of violence. We
categorically reject attempts to present the events of
7 October 2023 as the starting point for the current
bloody events in the region. The reasons for that run
much deeper and are linked to long-standing historical
injustices in which one side was given the opportunity
to establish its own State and the other was consistently
denied the very same right.
We will remain resolute in our demand to end the
violence against the Palestinians. Without a shadow of
a doubt, we will continue to highlight the abuses and
hypocrisy with which the United States approaches the
situation. We will not allow the United States to muzzle
the entire Council with its own hands in an effort to
further embolden Israel in its merciless operation. It
is our common duty to ensure that the voices of the
overwhelming majority of the people on Earth — who

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
10/15 24-35739
are calling for an end to the spiral of violence, a just
solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of the
internationally agreed legal parameters and Palestine’s
full membership of the United Nations — are heard.
We must bring peace, stability and prosperity to the
Middle East. No one, including the United States and
other Western States that indulge them, has the right to
obstruct those legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): Since the adoption
of resolution 2735 (2024) in June, the Security Council
has been hoping for and expecting the finalization
of a deal to achieve an immediate ceasefire and the
release of all hostages in Gaza. As the President of
the Council in June, I remember how desperately all
Council members aspired for the swift implementation
of this draft resolution (S/2024/835), which urges
both parties, notably Hamas, to accept the proposed
agreement. Since then, five months have passed, and
the conflict has brought even more death, misery
and destruction to Palestinian civilians and Israeli
hostages. And it is deeply disappointing that, in spite
of the efforts by the mediators — the United States,
Egypt and Qatar — resolution 2735 (2024) has yet to
be implemented. The Republic of Korea still hopes that
those diplomatic efforts will lead to a fruitful outcome
that accomplishes an immediate ceasefire, along with
the release of all hostages.
As repeatedly pointed out, under this ceaseless
armed conflict in Gaza, humanitarian efforts cannot
deliver substantive results. An immediate ceasefire
is not only an option; it is the only way to save lives
in Gaza. That is why the 10 elected members of the
Council, including the Republic of Korea, commenced a
new initiative demanding an immediate, unconditional
and permanent ceasefire in Gaza and, in parallel,
demanding an immediate and unconditional release of
all hostages.
It is regrettable that the draft resolution could
not garner the support needed to be adopted today.
However, we do believe that all members of the Council
agree on the imperative of an immediate ceasefire in
Gaza, although members may have different views on
how to arrive at that goal. Therefore, the Republic of
Korea will not lose hope for a ceasefire and the release
of all hostages at the earliest possible juncture.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, let me express
appreciation to Guyana for its important role in pushing
forward this important initiative for a resolution.
It has been more than 400 days since Hamas and
others killed more than 1,200 Israelis and took more
than 200 hostages, which Japan firmly condemns. Until
now, the devastation in Gaza has shown no signs of
abating, with tens of thousands of civilian casualties,
an appalling death toll among United Nations personnel
and humanitarian aid workers and massive displacement.
Given the ever-worsening situation, this draft resolution
(S/2024/835), had it been adopted, would have been a
much-needed pronouncement by the Security Council,
demanding an immediate ceasefire as well as an
immediate release of all hostages. Its adoption could
also have sent a strong message calling for a dramatic
expansion of humanitarian aid throughout the Strip,
in particular to the most vulnerable Palestinians in
the north. Therefore, Japan joined all the other elected
members as co-penholders of this draft resolution and
voted in favour of its adoption.
It is deeply regrettable that we could not arrive at
a text that all Council members could accept. However,
now is not the moment to trade accusations concerning
the continuation of this nightmare. The Council member
that could not support the draft resolution is working
tirelessly to end the agony in Gaza, and Japan continues
to support its diplomatic efforts.
Despite today’s setback, we should not stop
working to improve the catastrophic situation on the
ground. Today is World Children’s Day. But, without
our collective actions, the children in Gaza — the future
of Gaza — will continue to pay the high price of this
conflict. The Council must keep their plight in mind as
we work to immediately bring about the long-awaited
ceasefire. Japan remains steadfastly committed to that
end, both here at the Council and through multilateral
and bilateral channels as well.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank all the elected members, and
especially our coordinator, Guyana, for their unwavering
efforts in favour of urgent and necessary action by the
Council. I thank all members that supported our draft
resolution (S/2024/835). As co-penholder, Switzerland
voted in favour of the adoption of this draft resolution
and regrets that it was not adopted owing to the veto of
a permanent member.
More than five months after the adoption of
resolution 2735 (2024), this draft resolution reaffirmed
our commitment to an immediate, unconditional
and permanent ceasefire, to the immediate and

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 11/15
unconditional release of all hostages and to the safe,
rapid and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid to
the civilian population.
Switzerland reiterates that the obligations of the
parties in this matter continue regardless of whether
or not resolutions are adopted by the Council. It is
high time that the parties respect those obligations
and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in
accordance with international humanitarian law. The
violence and dehumanization in this conflict must end.
I would like to underline the strong commitment
of the group of elected members to unified action by
the Council. It can continue to count on us for future
action to promote peace and security among Israelis
and Palestinians and in the region as a whole.
The situation is urgent. In Gaza, civilians are
exposed to hostilities, incessant displacement,
epidemics and the risk of imminent famine, while the
hospital system has been almost completely destroyed.
As the occupying Power, Israel has a duty to ensure
that the basic needs of the population in the occupied
Palestinian territory are met.
The Council must also act, in accordance with its
mandate, to bring about a ceasefire, release all hostages
and protect civilians, including humanitarian personnel,
particularly those of the United Nations. There must be
an end to human suffering, a halt to the escalation of
violence in the region and the laying of foundations
for the solution of two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace, within secure
and recognized borders. Switzerland will continue to
support all efforts in that direction.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): After five
weeks of intense negotiations and a vote in favour
of adoption by 14 members of the Council, Guyana
deeply regrets that we were unable today to adopt the
draft resolution (S/2024/835) submitted by the elected
States members of the Council to pronounce on the
apocalyptic situation in Gaza. The main objective of the
draft resolution was to address some of the most critical
issues that currently feature in Israel’s more than year-
long war on Gaza. Those critical issues include the
ongoing atrocities of a scale and intensity that cause the
death toll to climb on a daily basis, and which has now
surpassed 43,000, the continued captivity of persons
taken from Israel in the brutal attack of 7 October 2023,
and the humanitarian situation that appears to have
reached its nadir, but then still worsens in unimaginable
ways.
The draft resolution just considered responded to
those critical issues, building on the legally binding
framework that the Council had established through
the four previous resolutions adopted since 7 October
2023. Importantly, the draft resolution would have
gone further by adding several critical dimensions to
that framework. Those include, for the first time, an
unequivocal call for an immediate, unconditional and
permanent ceasefire in Gaza, an affirmation of the
centrality of the role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in the humanitarian response in Gaza, as well as an
affirmation that respect for the International Court of
Justice and its functions is essential to international law
and justice and to an international order based on the
rule of law.
Contemplating the end of the war and the mammoth
investments that would be required for reconstruction,
the draft resolution sought to make a contribution to
day-after planning by requesting the Secretary-General
to prepare a comprehensive report that would include
a needs assessment for Gaza in the short, medium and
long term. It is therefore deeply disappointing that
those constructive contributions could not be added to
the legally binding framework already in place on the
war in Gaza.
Many have said that the ongoing annihilation of
the Palestinian people is a major stain on our collective
human conscience. Today the Council had the
opportunity to begin erasing that stain by demanding
an immediate, unconditional and permanent ceasefire.
But despite our best efforts and the almost universal
support to go in that direction, the Council was again
hamstrung by a veto. Guyana hopes that the inability
of the Council to adopt the draft resolution will not be
seen by those who want to continue this war as a licence
to continue killing, starving and maiming innocent
civilians.
The continuation of sheer misery cannot — and must
not — be the fate of the Palestinians. Their suffering
must end. They need to see the seeds of peace being
planted by the Council. They need to see that the
Security Council is giving peace a chance. That hope
was dashed today, but it has not been eclipsed. Guyana
will continue to work with fellow Council members

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
12/15 24-35739
to try to achieve tomorrow what we could not achieve
today. Not trying is simply not an option.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Guyana and the 10
elected Member States of the Security Council for their
tireless work on draft resolution S/2024/835.
The United Kingdom voted in favour of this draft
resolution as an expression of its determination to end
this war, stop the suffering in Gaza and secure the
immediate release of the hostages. The United Kingdom
remains resolute in its call for an immediate ceasefire,
the immediate release of all the hostages cruelly held
by Hamas since 7 October 2023 and urgent action to
address the humanitarian crisis.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Gaza is catastrophic and unacceptable. All of Gaza is
at the risk of famine, and in some areas it is likely to
be imminent. Yet the aid reaching civilians remains
entirely insufficient to mitigate this unfolding disaster.
The unthinkable hardship that civilians are already
facing in Gaza is set to get even worse as winter
approaches. Israel must take urgent action to alleviate
this crisis. International humanitarian law must be
respected by all sides.
We regret that the Council was unable to reach a
consensus on this issue. But we remain committed to
the vision of the text of the draft resolution. And we
will keep striving, alongside our partners, to bring this
war to a close, secure the release of the hostages, secure
a huge scale-up in aid and to protect civilians.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I apologize
for taking the floor. I just need to respond very briefly
to some comments made by the representative of the
Russian Federation. Let me just say, as I have said many
times, that Russia is in no position to single out any
State for being responsible for the deaths and killings of
civilians, when every day it is raining down hundreds
of missiles, bombs and unmanned aerial vehicles on the
people of Ukraine, conducting some of the most savage
and barbaric attacks seen in Europe since the Second
World War. We will continue to remind the world of
that barbarity carried out by a permanent member of the
Security Council, in blatant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. I would therefore say to my Russian
colleague that he should think twice before accusing
anyone of hypocrisy.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be brief. I want to ask the representative
of the United States a rhetorical question — he does
not have to answer it. Does he have any other narrative
other than the one he has delivered today? When we
listen to what he is saying, we get the impression that
we are watching the movie Groundhog Day.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): There is no right to the
mass killing of civilians. There is no right to starve
an entire civilian population. There is no right to
forcibly displace a people. And there is no right to
annexation. Yet that is what Israel is doing in Gaza.
Those are its war objectives. That is what the absence
of a ceasefire is allowing it to continue doing. The full-
fledged Israeli assault against the Palestinian people
and the Palestinian land is about everything except the
hostages. If the families of the hostages can see that,
how can anyone in this Chamber claim otherwise?
A ceasefire will enable us to save lives — all lives.
That was true a year ago, and it is even more true today.
A ceasefire does not resolve everything, but it is the
first step towards resolving anything. And what is the
answer of those who are still unwilling now, after all
this death and destruction, to call for an unconditional
ceasefire? Is it to accept that the killing should continue
until we resolve everything, while we watch as we are
resolving nothing?
We have heard over and over again statements in
this Chamber by all members, without distinction,
about the protection of civilians, about rejecting the
forcible displacement and starvation of the Palestinian
population, and about rejecting annexation, wanton
destruction and regional escalation. Everyone around
this table has agreed on those objectives. Yet here we
are, with 44,000 Palestinians killed — and that is those
who are accounted for. Many more are not accounted
for. One day, we will retrieve them in mass graves under

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 13/15
the rubble and discover the real numbers of that horror,
and there will be many that we will never retrieve.
Famine that is looming all over Gaza, and it is a
reality in northern Gaza. Two million people have been
displaced — still hunted even when they are in tents.
Gaza — and all the requirements for life in it — has
been totally destroyed. There is also an ongoing war on
Lebanon, its people and its sovereignty.
What does it mean for Council members to proclaim
all these principles, reiterate their rejection of Israel’s
actions and then shield Israel from the consequences of
its actions, thereby allowing it to do exactly what we are
asking it to stop doing?
The world should not grow accustomed to the death
of Palestinians, seeing Palestinian children starving and
seeing mothers carrying their children from one place to
another, forcibly displaced. We should not get accustomed
to seeing journalists and humanitarians killed. And
we should not get accustomed to seeing Palestinians
detained, abducted and carried on trucks to be tortured,
sexually abused and raped. The fact we are Palestinians
does not make that less shocking or outrageous. Maybe
for some, we have the wrong nationality, the wrong faith
or the wrong skin colour. But we are humans — and we
should be treated as such.
Is there a Charter of the United Nations for Israel
that is different from the Charter the rest of us have?
Tell us: is there an international law for them and an
international law for us? Do they have the right to kill,
and the only right that we have is to die?
What the hell more does Israel need to do for the
Council to act under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations? Or will the Council be the last place
on Earth that cannot recognize a threat to peace when
it sees it, when it is so glaring and so undeniable? The
Council is witnessing the attempt to annihilate a nation,
to destroy a nation. It is not even hidden; it is in plain
sight. And yet the very tools designed to respond to these
situations are not being used. So which one is it? Are
Palestinian lives not worth saving, or does Israel have a
license to kill? Can the Council only adopt resolutions
to then witness their blatant breach? This self-inflicted
powerlessness has to stop. Like the representative of
Algeria, we repeat that the resolutions of the Council
are binding. Their role is to be enforced. Their role is
to change reality, not to record violations for history’s
purposes and then allow them to continue.
Had diplomatic efforts succeeded, we would not be
here. We recognize all the efforts that were undertaken
and all the diplomatic efforts that were conducted. And
yet we have to recognize that children are still starving
in Gaza. Families are being killed. Communities are
being obliterated. Had those efforts succeeded, we would
not be here. But what we cannot accept is that Israel has
a veto that blocks any attempts to put an end to this war,
especially when we know what its true intentions are.
Many people and many Governments around the
world are saying the right things and trying to do the
right things. And here we must express our gratitude to
the 10 elected members of the Council (E10) for their
relentless efforts for over a year now and in the present
month. We were all hoping that resolution 2735 (2024)
would lead to a ceasefire. And we can discuss who is
responsible for that ceasefire not occurring. For us,
it is pretty clear that Israel never had the intention of
accepting a ceasefire and that it is has found every reason
not to have a ceasefire. We thank Guyana for its efforts
in coordinating the E10 initiative. We thank all of those
who voted in favour of the draft resolution. And we agree
with the representatives of Malta and Algeria that it is
the bare minimum that morality, humanity and legality
call for. And even that bare minimum was vetoed.
I truly do not understand. They say, “we cannot be
for an unconditional ceasefire”. What that means now, in
effect, is “we are for a war”. They are saying, “we cannot
be for an unconditional ceasefire that does not release the
hostages”. Is this war releasing the hostages? Is it even
trying to release the hostages? So what does that mean:
“we accept this war that is killing hostages and that is
killing, maiming, terrorizing and destroying an entire
nation”? When is it enough? When do we reach the point
at which we say, “no, we mean a ceasefire now”; “we will
not allow you to not listen to us, to ignore us, to insult us,
to play games with us”? This draft resolution is trying to
restore life, to save lives. It is not a dangerous message.
This veto is a dangerous message — to Israel that it can
continue executing its plans, the very plans they oppose.
And the messages we send do matter. And that is the
wrong message, at the worst possible time.
Israel is responsible for the Palestinian civilians it
kills. It cannot be absolved of that responsibility. It is
killing them purposefully, deliberately, repeatedly
and massively. It is starving them on purpose. Nobody
can deny it. We have sat in this Chamber and heard
every United Nations agency, every testimony, every
non-governmental organization — Palestinian, Israeli
and international — saying the same thing: this is by
design.
What does it mean that the release of the hostages
should be unconditional? That is what the Council has

S/PV.9790 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/11/2024
14/15 24-35739
said repeatedly now for a year: the release of hostages
should be unconditional. But is stopping the killing of
Palestinians conditional? Are there acceptable conditions
to stop the mass killing of Palestinians? There are 100
Israeli hostages, and there are 2 million Palestinians in
Gaza. They deserve better. They deserve respect for their
lives, for their suffering. Israel will always claim that
conditions have not been met, because its plans require
it to continue this war, to annex the land and to destroy
the people. And therefore we can no longer accept its
conditions. Fourteen months have passed, and we are
still debating if a genocide must be stopped. There is no
justification whatsoever for vetoing a draft resolution
that is trying to stop atrocities. There is no justification
for that.
One day someone will dig up the records of these
meetings and will see us pleading for the lives of our
people over and over and over and over again. And they
will try to understand why our calls were not heeded.
They will look at the people who sat around this table
and spoke and addressed the Council, from all over
the world, to call on the Council to take action. They
will read what everybody here has said. And then they
will wonder how a genocide displayed on television
and known to the whole world was able to continue for
this long. They will wonder how, if the whole world
was against the mass killing, against the displacement,
against the starvation and against the annexation, it all
occurred. It is because we are allowed to speak about the
rules, but not to enforce them — because we can regret
and reject, but not act.
There are many States stepping up now to change
this reality. We call on all States and all peoples to stand
for life, for freedom and for peace. We are out of time.
We repeat that we are against harming any civilians. And
we have more than enough of our share of grievances.
We could have sat here and tried to justify harming
civilians. We never did, not for one day. And we are still
sitting here, after tens of thousands of our people have
been killed, many have been detained and all have been
traumatized and displaced. We have many reasons to
say otherwise, and yet we remain steadfast: there is no
reason to harm civilians, regardless of their nationality,
their origin or the circumstances. But our civilians? What
about our civilians? They are worthy of protection. Their
lives should be saved. People cannot sit and demand
Palestinian pacifism under all circumstances and enable
Israeli militarism. That cannot be done. Either you
believe that violence is an impasse and that there are no
military solutions, and then you act for peaceful ones and
reject military ones, or you let it be military. We are for
a peaceful path, even after all that has happened. Help us
shout it, do not block it. Stop them. Help us. The Council
would be helping Palestinians and Israelis and our region
and the world.
There is a world out there where Palestinian children
are able to grow. We are not born to be occupied and
killed and displaced. That is not our destiny. That is
not our fate. There is a world where we could live and
grow and see our children grow, with no occupation, no
bombs, no tents, no settlements, no walls, no military
checkpoints, no prisons, no constant humiliation, no
oppression, no houses demolished, no amputations, no
pain and no agony. That world could exist today, if we
were to act. And the fact we are not means that many,
many more Palestinians will suffer — and others will
suffer. We are trying to get there. We are trying to find
a path that leads us there — to freedom, to life and to
peace. That should be our common objective.
There is a world where there is no war in the Middle
East; where Palestinians and Israeli civilians go about
their lives; where maybe they can look confidently
towards the future and even envisage more bridges
between them; and where our region unleashes its true
and full potential for the benefit of all States and all
peoples. It is that future that is being destroyed before our
very eyes, and the entire Palestinian civilian population
is the primary victim.
We call on the General Assembly to uphold the
responsibilities that the Council has failed to uphold
owing to the veto cast by the United States. We call on
all States to use all available tools to stop the massacres.
The draft resolution was calling for an unconditional end
to massacres, and that is always worth supporting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Before I begin, I listened to
the statement of the observer of the Observer State of
Palestine very carefully. He mentioned a future with
no pain and no suffering, but there was one word he
did not mention during his statement — and I listened
very carefully. What about Hamas? He must include in
his statement that a future for Gaza is a future without
Hamas. One cannot describe a world or a reality without
mentioning the reason that we are sitting in this Chamber
today, namely, the brutality of Hamas and the pain that
the people of Gaza are suffering because of Hamas.
Today most of the members of the Council failed.
They betrayed their own principles, their responsibilities
to the innocent and their duty to uphold justice. The draft
resolution brought before this Chamber (S/2024/835)
was not a path to peace; it was a road map to more terror,

20/11/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9790
24-35739 15/15
more suffering and more bloodshed. Many Council
members attempted to adopt that injustice. We thank the
United States for exercising its veto, for standing on the
side of morality and justice and for refusing to abandon
the hostages and their families.
The text ignored the suffering of the 101 innocent
hostages still held by Hamas in Gaza. Had it been
adopted today, the Council would have sent a message
to the world that terrorists can act with impunity and
that the United Nations will shield and surrender to
murderers, rapists and kidnappers rather than holding
them accountable.
Last week, Sasha Trufanov should have celebrated
his twenty-ninth birthday surrounded by friends and
family. Instead, he is being held by terrorist monsters
who recently released a video showcasing his torture.
Sasha has been starved. His face is bruised, and his spirit
is crushed. Hamas does not just imprison; it torments
and dehumanizes. It rejoices in its cruelty. And now it
knows that the Council will do nothing to stop it. I would
like to remind Ambassador Nebenzia that Sasha is a
Russian citizen. He is a citizen of one of the 29 nations
with citizens held hostage by Hamas, including Russia.
Naama Levy, a bright young woman who was just
19 years old, was taken and dragged into hell. Naama
volunteered at a kindergarten for refugees, bringing light
and love to children in need. We have seen the horrible
images of her ankles cut and her sweatpants soaked
in blood. Naama’s innocence, humanity and dreams
were all stolen by Hamas. Today some members of the
Council told her family that her life is not worth enough
to demand her freedom.
Those who supported the draft resolution have
announced to the world that the lives of Sasha, Naama
and 99 other innocent people are not valuable enough to
be a condition for a ceasefire. Today the United Nations
celebrates World Children’s Day. Rather than demanding
that little children like Ariel and Kfir Bibas be released
immediately after 411 days in captivity, the Council is
attempting to adopt a draft resolution declaring that their
precious lives are not worth our time.
That is not diplomacy; it is appeasement. It is the
abandonment of the very idea that the Council claims to
defend. The world should be clear-eyed about what that
text truly represents: it rewards Hamas for its barbarity.
It validates Hamas’ strategy of using human shields,
targeting civilians and tormenting hostages in its terror
dungeons. It would have set a horrifying precedent
that terrorism pays and that violence is met not with
condemnation, but with concessions.
Why could the Council not agree on a condemnation
of Hamas? Members mentioned that they worked
tirelessly to draft the draft resolution. Could the 14
countries that voted in favour of the draft not sit down
and agree to condemn, in one line, the atrocities of
Hamas? Was that so difficult? The Council has already
adopted four resolutions demanding the release of the
hostages. Hamas has ignored every one of them. Why
would it not? It has faced no consequences for its crimes,
no repercussions for its atrocities and no accountability
for its barbarity.
The loss of civilian life in Gaza is a tragedy, but it is
a tragedy authored by Hamas. Hamas started the war. It
has to be said that Hamas started the war on 7 October.
We are not here because we want to be here. Hamas has
held innocent Israelis hostage for over 400 days, with no
sign of life or humanitarian access. It uses Palestinian
civilians as human shields. If the Council fails to place
the blame on the terrorists, it only emboldens them
further.
Israel will continue to defend itself. We will never
abandon our hostages, and the Council must understand
that. Members must consider their own values and
understand why we will never forget them and never stop
fighting for their freedom. If Hamas were to release the
hostages and surrender its weapons, not one more shot
would need to be fired. But until that day comes, Israel
will do whatever it takes to protect its people and bring
our loved ones home.
Today the Council had the opportunity to stand on
the side of justice, decency and humanity. If not for the
United States, it would have chosen appeasement to
reward terror and abandon the innocent. History will
remember today’s vote. It will remember who stood with
the hostages, the victims and the principles of peace, and
who betrayed them to shield terrorists.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
