Foreign Minister Delivers Saudi Arabia's Speech at the 79th Session of the UN General Assembly
New York, September 29, 2024, SPA -- Minister of Foreign Affairs Prince Faisal bin Farhan bin Abdullah delivered on Saturday, September 28, 2024, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's speech at the 79th session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Following is the speech:
"We congratulate Philemon Yang on his election as president of the 79th session of the UN General Assembly and express our gratitude to Dennis Francis for his leadership during the 78th session.
We also thank UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his unwavering dedication to the principles and objectives of the UN Charter.
Mr. President,
A founding member of the UN, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has been committed to upholding the principles of the UN Charter since its founding. This commitment is demonstrated through our compliance with international law, dedication to preserving international peace and security, and active engagement in multilateral initiatives in various fields.
The Kingdom actively participated in drafting this week's Pact for the Future.  We view the Pact and the Summit of the Future as vital opportunities to reaffirm shared principles, strengthen collaborative efforts to address global challenges, promote peace and security, and advance sustainable development for future generations. The Kingdom emphasizes empowering international financial institutions to ensure continued economic recovery and mitigate risks.
Mr. President,
Our world today is witnessing many crises exacerbated by the satisfaction of managing them without finding practical solutions to address them. This is due to the laxity of practical international efforts and selectivity in implementing international law and international humanitarian law. This has resulted in the expansion of the circle of violence and conflicts and the threat to the principles of international legitimacy. This requires us to adhere to the principles and foundations set by the United Nations Charter, work together, and focus on long-term peaceful solutions that ensure the protection of civilians, end fighting and wars, and provide security and development regionally and internationally. In light of the existing tensions between countries, the Kingdom adopts an approach of avoiding political polarization in the international community and seeks to enhance dialogue, understanding, and rapprochement between countries in a way that enhances global security and peace.
In this regard, the Kingdom reiterates its rejection and condemnation of all Israeli crimes committed against the Palestinian people. The recent attacks against defenseless civilians in the Gaza Strip represent just one chapter in the decades-long suffering of the Palestinians. Since last year, brutal Israeli actions have resulted in the death of tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians, predominantly women and children, through systematic bombings, killings, destruction, and imposed starvation. This is creating a major humanitarian catastrophe that continues to worsen daily.
Based on our categorical rejection of this tragic reality and the urgent need for action, the Kingdom hosted the Joint Arab-Islamic Extraordinary Summit in Riyadh on November 11, 2023, in the presence of the leaders of the states and governments of the member states of the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The resulting resolutions, reflecting the collective will of the Arab and Islamic peoples, called for an immediate end to the bloodshed, unrestricted delivery of aid, and fulfillment of the legitimate demands of the Palestinian people, including the restoration of their occupied lands and the establishment of an independent state.
The Kingdom chaired the ministerial committee established by the summit, tasked with engaging various countries and urging the international community to fulfill its responsibilities, halt the Israeli aggression, and protect Palestinian civilians.
In line with this position, the Kingdom welcomed the UN General Assembly's May 10, 2024 resolution, affirming the State of Palestine's eligibility for full UN membership. We also commend the decisions by Norway, Spain, Ireland, Slovenia, and Armenia to formally recognize the State of Palestine and encourage other countries to follow suit. Sensing our shared responsibility to take serious action to embody recognition of the independent Palestinian state, the Kingdom, along with its partners, members of the Joint Arab-Islamic Ministerial Committee, the Kingdom of Norway, and the European Union, announced the launch of the International Alliance to Implement the Two-State Solution. We call on everyone to join this alliance.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom has provided the Palestinian people with over $5 billion in aid. Since the beginning of the current crisis in Gaza, we have delivered nearly $185 million worth of relief and humanitarian assistance through the King Salman Humanitarian Aid And Relief Centre (KSrelief). Agreements totaling over $106 million have been signed with various UN and international humanitarian organizations to implement critical aid projects. The Kingdom remains committed to supporting UNRWA in its efforts to provide essential relief services, including food, medicine, and other humanitarian needs, to Palestinian refugees. Our total contributions to UNRWA have reached more than  $1 billion.
The Kingdom welcomes the International Court of Justice's advisory opinion regarding Israel's policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian territories, which confirms the illegality of Israel's 57-year presence there. The Kingdom emphasizes the urgent need for practical and credible steps toward a just and comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian issue. This resolution must be based on international law and the Arab Peace Initiative and ensure the Palestinian people's right to an independent state within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The lack of accountability for Israel's persistent violations of international law and international humanitarian law only emboldens further escalation. This escalation will not achieve security and stability for any party involved but risks grave consequences, including the spread of violence and wars, further threatening regional security and stability.
The Kingdom stresses the need to preserve Lebanon's stability and respect its sovereignty in accordance with international law and relevant UN Security Council resolutions. We support international efforts to establish an immediate ceasefire and facilitate a sustainable diplomatic solution. We also call on all parties to exercise wisdom and the utmost self-restraint to spare the region and its people the dangers of wars and their tragedies.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom has taken decisive steps to promote regional peace and development. Our agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran to resume diplomatic relations is based on mutual respect for state sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, and adherence to the UN and Organization of Islamic Cooperation charters. We believe this will contribute significantly to regional security, stability, and prosperity. We anticipate Iran's cooperation with the international community regarding its nuclear program and ballistic missiles.
The Kingdom has also resumed diplomatic relations with the Syrian Arab Republic to strengthen cooperation and coordination on issues of mutual concern. We believe resolving the Syrian crisis is essential for regional development and stability. The Kingdom underscores the importance of preserving Syria's unity, security, stability, and territorial integrity, ultimately benefiting the Syrian people.
The Kingdom is committed to restoring peace to Yemen and supports all efforts aimed at resolving the crisis, alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people, and achieving a political solution that restores security and stability to Yemen and the broader region. We reaffirm our commitment to our initiative to end the war in Yemen and achieve a comprehensive political settlement.
Given the tensions in the Red Sea region, which threaten the security and safety of international shipping lanes and global trade, the Kingdom reiterates its call for de-escalation and increased cooperation to maintain regional security and stability. Freedom of navigation in these waters is a crucial international principle that impacts the interests of the entire world.
Regarding Sudan, the Kingdom affirms its steadfast commitment to preserving the country's security, stability, and the unity of the state and institutions. We are dedicated to preventing further collapse and supporting Sudan as it navigates the present crisis and its repercussions. The Kingdom hosted Sudanese peace talks in Jeddah to underscore the urgent need for a ceasefire, an end to military operations, and the delivery of humanitarian aid. Efforts are underway to resume the third round of the Jeddah talks to achieve these goals.
The Kingdom reiterates its commitment to Afghanistan's security, stability, and territorial integrity, emphasizing that Afghanistan cannot exist in isolation from its regional and global context. This is particularly crucial given the threat of terrorist organizations still operating in Afghanistan. It is imperative to prevent further deterioration of humanitarian, security, and economic conditions, as this could empower extremist groups and militias. Economic progress and development hinge on political and social stability in this country.
The Kingdom reiterates its urgent call to end the Russia-Ukraine crisis, emphasizing the need to mitigate its global impact on security and stability. HRH the Crown Prince and Prime Minister has exerted great efforts to secure the release of prisoners of various nationalities. Last year, the Kingdom hosted a meeting of national security advisors and representatives from over 40 countries and international organizations, demonstrating its commitment to resolving the conflict. The Kingdom stresses the importance of employing all peaceful means to end the crisis, upholding international law, and protecting the security and interests of all parties involved. The Kingdom also reaffirms its readiness to continue mediating between Russia and Ukraine.
Mr. President,
Through its Vision 2030, the Kingdom seeks to realize the aspirations of future generations, empower women and youth, foster creativity and innovation, cultivate a tolerant culture, and build communication bridges with the world. Our development approach prioritizes human rights, dignity, and well-being and aims at a comprehensive and sustainable renaissance that benefits all citizens.
Mr. President,
In the energy field, the Kingdom is committed to achieving a balance among three pillars: energy security, providing affordable energy for all, and diminishing the effects of climate change. The Kingdom is keen on the stability, reliability, and sustainability of global oil markets and on meeting needs to make energy amply available, ensure ease of access to it, the security and safety of supplies, and a prosperous global economy that benefits producers and consumers.
The Kingdom is committed to contributing to mitigating the effects of climate change by adopting a comprehensive approach to energy transition based on a logical, organized, and fair basis so that the goals of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement are achieved by taking advantage of all technologies that contribute to addressing greenhouse gas emissions from all sources, including oil and gas, which will continue to be a crucial part of the global energy mix for decades to come.
Beyond the existing technologies that have made it a leader in low-carbon and methane emission intensity in the oil and gas sector, the Kingdom continues to invest in developing other low-emission energy solutions.
In line with this commitment, the Kingdom is establishing a carbon capture, transport, and storage hub in Jubail Industrial City. It is expected to capture and store up to nine million tons of carbon dioxide annually by 2027, potentially expanding to 44 million tons annually by 2035.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom is committed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and addressing the challenges of climate change through international cooperation. As announced at the Saudi-African Summit in Riyadh, we have allocated approximately $50 billion to support these efforts.
We have launched several groundbreaking initiatives using the circular carbon economy approach, including the Saudi Green Initiative and the Middle East Green Initiative. We also invest in cutting-edge technologies to reduce carbon intensity, expand renewable energy sources in our energy mix, and produce clean hydrogen. We aim to become a global leader in producing and exporting clean hydrogen.
The Kingdom supports numerous projects to ration consumption, improve energy efficiency, protect wildlife, and conserve water and marine resources.
In keeping with its commitment to environmental protection and combating drought and desertification, the Kingdom hosted this year's World Environment Day, led by the United Nations Environment Program. At the end of this year, the Kingdom will host the Conference of the Parties (COP 16) to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
The Kingdom has been selected to host the 11th World Water Forum in 2027. This aligns with the establishment of the Global Water Organization, announced by HRH the Crown Prince and Prime Minister in September of last year. The organization aims to unify and coordinate the efforts of countries and organizations to address water challenges comprehensively.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom is committed to working toward a world free of nuclear weapons and a stable Middle East. We emphasize the need for all countries to adhere to the nonproliferation regime while maintaining the right to peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom supports efforts to combat terrorist organizations and underscores the importance of increased cooperation among international partners to address the threats these organizations pose to our countries and peoples. We emphasize the need to counter terrorist propaganda campaigns effectively, continue international efforts to combat financing terrorism, and exchange relevant information.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom has earned the international community's trust by being selected to host Expo 2030 with the theme "The Era of Change: Together for a Foresighted Tomorrow." This global event aims to envision the future of our planet and foster technological advancement in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Expo presents a unique opportunity to collaborate on projects with a global impact and seek innovative, sustainable, and inclusive solutions. The Kingdom extends its gratitude to the countries that supported our bid to host this prestigious event.
Finally, we look forward to sharing our message, values, and principles with the world in a spirit of respect and partnership and working together to build a better future for all."
The Kingdom’s speech was attended by Her Royal Highness Princess Reema Bandar Al Saud, Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to the United States, Deputy Minister for International Multilateral Affairs and General Supervisor of the Public Diplomacy Deputyship Dr. Abdulrahman Al-Rassi, the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations in New York, Ambassador Dr. Abdulaziz Al-Wasil, Ambassador Haytham bin Hassan Al-Malki, and the Director-General of the Office of His Highness the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Abdulrahman Aldawood.
-- SPA
14:19 Local Time 11:19 GMT
0017
UN General Assembly
