Deputizing for Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, HRH the Crown Prince Chairs and Inaugurates Joint Arab Islamic Extraordinary Summit
Riyadh, November 11, 2023, SPA -- His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, Crown Prince and Prime Minister, deputizing for Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, chaired and inaugurated the Joint Arab Islamic Extraordinary Summit in Riyadh.
Before the start of the summit, group photos were taken for HRH the Crown Prince and the leaders and heads of the participating countries.
At the outset of the summit, verses from the Holy Quran were recited.
Inaugurating the summit, HRH the Crown Prince delivered the following speech:
In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,
I announce the inauguration of the Joint Arab Islamic Extraordinary Summit.
Your Majesties, Excellencies and Highnesses,
Secretary General of the Arab League,
Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Honorable attendees,
Peace be upon you.
On behalf of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, we are pleased to welcome you to your second country, and to convey to you the King's wishes for a successful summit.
This summit is held as we witness extraordinary and painful circumstances. In this regard, we affirm our condemnation and rejection of the ruthless war to which our brothers in Palestine are subjected, in which thousands of unarmed civilians, children, women and the elderly were killed, and in which hospitals, places of worship and infrastructure were destroyed.
The Kingdom has exerted unremitting efforts since the beginning of the events to protect civilians in Gaza Strip, and continuously consulted and coordinated with its brothers and effective countries to stop the war.
We now reiterate our demands for an immediate halt to military operations, for the provision of humanitarian corridors to aid civilians, and for enabling international humanitarian organizations to perform their role.
We also stress the call for the release of hostages and detainees, and to spare the lives of innocent people.
We are witnessing a humanitarian catastrophe that demonstrates the failure of the Security Council and the international community to put an end to the flagrant Israeli violations of international laws and norms, and international humanitarian law. It confirms the double standards and selectivity in the application of these laws. This threatens global security and stability. Therefore, we are required to exert coordinated effort and take effective action to confront this unfortunate situation.
We call for working together to lift the siege, to bring humanitarian and relief aid and secure medical supplies for the sick and injured people in Gaza.
Your Excellencies,
The Kingdom categorically rejects the continued aggression, occupation and forced displacement of the population of Gaza. It also firmly holds the occupation authorities responsible for the crimes committed against the Palestinian people and their infrastructure.
We are certain that the only way to achieve security, peace and stability in the region is by ending the occupation, siege and settlements, on the one hand, and enabling the Palestinian people to obtain their legitimate rights and establish an independent state within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the other, two prerogatives that guarantee security and stability in the countries of the region.
--SPA
16:07 Local Time 13:07 GMT
0033
