Prime Minister of Israel, Hon. Benjamin Netanyahu has conveyed to the government and the people of Papua New Guinea Israel’s deep gratitude for PNG’s support to his country over the years and especially during these times of conflict in the Middle East.
Prime Minister Marape received the commendations delivered directly by Israel’s Deputy Foreign Minister, Hon. Sharren Haskel today (20.10.25) during a courtesy call she made on the Prime Minister at Melanesian House, Waigani.
The Deputy Minister highlighted Prime Minister Marape’s earlier decision to open the PNG embassy in Jerusalem instead of Tel Aviv, and for the support to Israel given through the United Nations.
She said, “My visit here was specifically addressed by the Prime Minister to see how we can strengthen our friendship further, and to say Thank You for standing beside us especially in the last two years. These have been some of our darkest hours since 7th October 2023.
“This is a special mission for me, from the Government of Israel and Prime Minister Netanyahu to come and thank you personally. We have many friends around the world but during the last two years, true friends showed their strength, their courage and moral clarity. And you have been one of the most outstanding friends we have standing together on the international front, on bilateral relationship, and in international forums.
“You have opened the PNG embassy in Jerusalem, and for that we are extremely grateful. This is acknowledgement of our history, our tradition, and of us – the Jewish people – who are the indigenous people of the land of Israel; that we are able to return to revive our religion, culture and language in our ancestral homeland.”
Deputy Minister Haskel added that with Israel currently engaged in complying with the ceasefire in the war with Hamas, as directed by the recent United Nations decision, many overseas government engagements have been put on hold but for the visit to Papua New Guinea and Pacific Island countries which PM Netanyahu has requested should proceed without delay.
Prime Minister Marape, in response, reaffirmed Papua New Guinea’s commitment to the bilateral relationship, highlighting that PNG recognizes Israel’s rights to the land of Israel through its Judeo-Christian worldview, and continues to recognize Jerusalem as the “eternal” capital of Israel through the PNG embassy in the city. The opening of the embassy, he added, has encouraged other Pacific countries to establish their diplomatic missions in Jerusalem as well.
He said, “Papua New Guinea stands with Israel during these difficult times it is going through as the people of Israel look to find peace.
“As I always say, peace can only be found at the table of peace; never at the barrel of the gun. We still maintain the call to Hamas – if they really value peace in Gaza, they must take the first step to show they are genuine about peace.”
Ms Haskel has reconfirmed Israel’s commitment to continue assisting PNG in the areas of science and technology, agriculture, health, small business development, and women’s empowerment. In her visit to PNG today and tomorrow (21.10.25), she and her delegation will meet with ministers in respective fields as she continues to anchor projects in these areas.
Papua New Guinea began its diplomatic relations with Israel in 1978, three years after Independence, and has engaged in bilateral activities with Israel over this 47-year period under various prime ministers. However, since 2023 un- der the Marape-led Government, PNG has elevated its relationship to new heights by becoming the first Asia-Pacific country to open its diplomatic mission in Jerusalem with only four other countries. Under Prime Minister Marape,
PNG has continued to support Israel at the United Nations, especially in the Israel-Palestine conflict where PM Marape voted against the Two-State Solution at the 80th United Nations General Assembly last month. PNG was one of only nine countries to take this action.
