Office of Press and Public Diplomacy
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Joint Statement of the United States, the Kingdom of Morocco, and the State of Israel
The United States Representative to the United Nations Ambassador Mike Waltz, the Moroccan Minister of Foreign Affairs Nasser Bourita, and the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs Gideon Sa’ar met today in New York to discuss the unlimited opportunities of the relations between the Kingdom of Morocco and the State of Israel. This meeting was held within the framework of Morocco-US-Israel joint declaration of 22 December 2020.
In this context and undaunted by regional challenges, the United States, Morocco and Israel reaffirm the spirit of the Abraham Accords and continue to believe the establishment of full diplomatic, peaceful and friendly relations between Morocco and Israel is in the common interest of both countries and will advance the cause of peace and unlock new opportunities for the entire region. The parties look forward to enhancing their trilateral cooperation in the international arena.
Israel and Morocco recognize & appreciate the United States and especially President Trump as a visionary leader uniquely capable of bringing peace where no one else thought it was possible. The participants understand that deeper regional integration, building on this historic foundation, will lead to further peace, stability, and shared prosperity across the Middle East and beyond.
As mentioned in the Morocco-US-Israel joint declaration of 22 December 2020, the participants confirmed their agreement regarding the elevation of the diplomatic missions between Morocco and Israel to full embassies and the exchange of ambassadors. They agreed to take the necessary measures for prompt reinstatement of direct flights between Morocco and Israel including by Israeli and Moroccan airline companies before the end of the year.
Israel and Morocco have agreed to finalize, by the end of 2026, agreements on the protection of investments and the avoidance of double taxation, which will facilitate reciprocal investments and help promote economic and business ties between the peoples and countries.
The United States and Israel reaffirm their recognition of Moroccan sovereignty over the entire Western Sahara territory and their support for Morocco’s serious, credible, and realistic autonomy proposal as the only basis for a just and lasting solution to the dispute over the Western Sahara territory. Any other path prolongs the status quo and is unacceptable. This urgently needed solution will not only bring peace to the region but prosperity and greater integration for all of Africa.
The participants deeply value their cooperation in technology, security, and innovation, especially during challenging times. This cooperation continues to strengthen bilateral and trilateral relations and offers practical solutions that benefit the peoples of the region.
The United States and Israel recognize the special ties between Moroccan Monarchs and the Moroccan Jewish community living in Morocco and throughout the world including in the United States and Israel.
The countries discussed how best to continue to promote dynamic and innovative economic bilateral cooperation and expand cooperation on trade; finance and investment; innovation and technology; tourism; water, agriculture, and food security; development; regional security; energy and telecommunications. The participants agreed to advance high level visits in the coming months.
The countries commit to furthering peace and friendly relations and pursuing a vision of peace, prosperity and security in the region and around the world.
###
