Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9763*
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9763rd meeting
Tuesday, 29 October 2024, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Cassis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bendjama
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fu Cong
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Montalvo Sosa
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Todd
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamazaki
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fernandes
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kanu
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Žbogar
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-31894 (E)
*2431894*
*Reissued for technical reasons 14 November 2024.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
2/28 24-31894
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I extend a
warm welcome to the Ministers and the other high-
level representatives present in the Chamber. Their
presence today attests to the importance of the issue
for consideration.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mexico,
Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in the meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Stavros Lambrinidis, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People; His Excellency Mr. Paul Beresford-Hill,
Permanent Observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta
to the United Nations; and Her Excellency Mrs. Elardja
Flitti, Deputy Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: We have now entered the second
year of this horrific conflict, and the region is on the
verge of yet another serious escalation. The violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the wider region
shows no signs of abating Just yesterday in Gaza,
Israeli forces struck a building in Beit Lahiya, leaving
at least 60 Palestinians dead, including at least 25
children, according to preliminary figures provided by
the Gaza Ministry of Health. That strike is yet another
in a deadly series of recent mass casualty incidents in
the northern part of the Gaza Strip. We are witnessing
not only a horrific humanitarian nightmare, but also a
rapidly accelerating unravelling of the prospects for a
sustainable resolution to the conflict.
I was again in the Gaza Strip last week, and what I
witnessed defies imagination. In the southern part of the
Strip, I saw the sheer magnitude of the devastation that
the war has inflicted on the population. I saw immense
destruction of residential buildings, roads, hospitals
and schools. I saw thousands living in makeshift tents,
with nowhere else to go as winter approaches. Let me
add anecdotally that, on the way from the crossing into
Gaza up to the Japanese health compound in Khan
Younis, in and out of the Strip, I could count only two
buildings that were not totally or partly destroyed.
I spoke with our United Nations colleagues and their
humanitarian partners, who face increasing challenges
in their tireless efforts to deliver vital assistance. They
described the dire humanitarian situation in northern
Gaza, which has received virtually no humanitarian
assistance since the start of October.
I also heard from Palestinian non-governmental
organizations, whose demands were very clear: the
war must end. Civilians must be protected. And they
must be able to access assistance to meet their basic
needs. And even in the face of just trying to survive,
they recognized that there must be a kind of political
solution here, for the conflict and the occupation to end.
In Israel, I have also repeatedly heard the cries of
victims. This 7 October was a grim marker of Hamas’s
horrific attack in Israel that terrorized the population
and marked a year of captivity for hostages who are still
being held in Gaza in unbearable conditions and denied
International Committee of the Red Cross visits, their

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 3/28
fates unknown. For them as well, this nightmare must
end, and the hostages must be freed.
We are also at the most dangerous juncture in
the Middle East in decades. The Council was briefed
yesterday by my colleague on the serious escalations
between Iran and Israel this month (see S/PV.9762).
Meanwhile, the hostilities between Hizbullah and Israel
are inflicting civilian casualties, massive displacement
and destruction on both sides of the Blue Line. Armed
groups operating from Yemen, Iraq and Syria also
continued to launch missiles and projectiles towards
Israel. Israel has reportedly carried out dozens of air
strikes in Syria in the past month.
Every effort — by all of us — must be made to
de-escalate the situation and establish a different
trajectory towards greater peace and stability in the
region. We need a ceasefire, and we need the hostages
to be released from Gaza now. I urge all parties to
engage constructively in urgent diplomatic efforts to
de-escalate the situation and avoid an endless spiral of
death and destruction.
In the almost 13 months since the brutal attacks
perpetrated by Hamas and other Palestinian armed
groups on 7 October 2023, more than 42,000
Palestinians and more than 1,600 Israelis and foreign
nationals have been killed, with 101 hostages still held
in captivity in Gaza. Tens of thousands of people have
been injured, the vast majority of them Palestinians,
including a staggering number of women and children.
Palestinian medics and journalists and more than
230 United Nations staff have been killed. Israeli
military operations and fighting with Hamas and
other Palestinian armed groups continued across the
Strip. Israeli military evacuation orders cover more
than 80 per cent of the Strip. Nearly 2 million people
are displaced.
In recent weeks, Israeli military operations have
intensified in the northern Strip, killing more scores
of Palestinians. Military actions have also caused
the closure of essential services, including water
wells and medical facilities, further exacerbating the
humanitarian crisis. I again unequivocally condemn the
widespread killing and injuring of civilians in Gaza, the
endless displacement of the population in Gaza and the
shocking mistreatment of detainees. I also condemn the
continued holding of hostages in Gaza and the firing of
rockets towards Israeli population centres, which has
continued this month.
A fundamental shift is required to improve
humanitarian operations in Gaza. It is essential to
establish a safe enabling environment, meet operational
requirements, including funding, and ensure that
Israeli authorities facilitate access that will allow for
unimpeded movement of food, shelter materials for
the winter, medicine, fuel and the capacity to repair
essential life-saving infrastructure. The mounting
lawlessness inside the Strip must also be addressed.
The second round of the polio campaign began on
14 October in central and southern Gaza, and it was
very successful, with more than 90 per cent vaccinated.
However, we have yet to access the north. I urge the
Israeli authorities to facilitate the full roll-out of the
campaign and a similarly coordinated effort to meet
winter needs.
As the focus remains on Gaza and the escalating
violence in the region, the situation in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is also
deteriorating. Violence continued at alarming levels,
having intensified since the conflict in Gaza began.
During the reporting period, 54 Palestinians, including
three women and eight children, were killed, mostly
in the context of Israeli security forces operations in
Area A, which the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) say are
targeting Palestinian armed groups and militants. In
the same period, eight Israelis, including four women,
were killed by Palestinians in shooting attacks in the
West Bank and Israel. Another two Israelis, including
one woman, were killed in separate shooting attacks in
Israel by Arab citizens of Israel.
On 1 October, two Palestinians carried out a
shooting and stabbing attack in Jaffa, killing seven and
wounding 15. On 3 October in Tulkarm, 18 Palestinians
were killed in an Israeli air strike, including one woman
and three children. Israeli security forces said they
killed a Hamas commander and several Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad militants in the camp. That
was the single-deadliest such incident in the West Bank
in nearly 20 years.
With the start of the olive harvest this month, daily
settler attacks and harassment continued across the West
Bank, sometimes in the presence, or with the support
of, Israeli forces. On 17 October, an IDF personnel shot
dead a 59-year-old Palestinian woman harvesting olives
in the West Bank. The olive harvest is critical to the
Palestinian local economy. However, settler violence,
along with restrictions on access to land imposed by

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
4/28 24-31894
both settlers and Israeli forces, place it at grave risk. I
strongly condemn all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror. I call on Israel to protect the
Palestinian population and to hold perpetrators of all
violence accountable. I urge security forces to exercise
maximum restraint and to use lethal force only when it
is strictly unavoidable to protect life.
On 28 October, the Israeli Knesset adopted two
laws on the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
forbidding Israeli State officials from contact with
UNRWA or its representatives and prohibiting UNRWA
operations within what is referred to as the “sovereign
territory of the State of Israel”. Those developments risk
bringing about the collapse of UNRWA’s operations
across the occupied Palestinian territory and severely
undermine humanitarian operations in Gaza, which
rely on UNRWA. Those bills are set to go into effect
in 90 days.
The rights of Palestine refugees were set out in a
General Assembly resolution that predates the creation
of UNRWA (General Assembly resolution 194 (III)).
Unilateral steps, such as that legislation, which not
only seek to undermine work that the United Nations
is mandated to do but threaten to further set back
a political resolution to the conflict on the basis of
United Nations resolutions and international law, must
be avoided.
The confluence of challenges across the region
requires us to act with urgency to cease hostilities and
de-escalate. We must have a ceasefire, now. We must
have the release of hostages in Gaza, now. Without
a ceasefire, the fundamental shift required to scale
up humanitarian assistance that can meet the current
catastrophe in Gaza and to improve the situation for
humanitarian deliveries will be impossible.
We must also concretely advance a political
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
by ceasing irreversible and unilateral steps on the
ground that undermine the two-State solution. We
urgently need a set of understandings to establish a
political and security framework in Gaza in line with
the principles I have outlined repeatedly to the Council.
Those frameworks must facilitate a Palestinian
Government structure that can reunify Gaza and
the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
politically, economically and administratively, with
no reductions in its territory, with no displacement of
Palestinians from the Strip. All efforts to those ends
must be prioritized.
I am very concerned that facts on the ground
are being established that will undermine those core
principles for years to come. That includes the attempt
by Israel to dismantle UNRWA. I have repeatedly said
that there can be no long-term solution in Gaza that is
not political. There must be a path to end the occupation
and achieve a two-State solution.
Israelis and Palestinians don’t deserve this
unrelenting conflict, which has ruined countless lives.
They deserve a better future, one without open-ended
conflict, occupation and regional war. We must do
everything in our power to chart a course towards a just
and lasting peace that will enable a two-State solution
on the basis of United Nations resolutions, previous
agreements and international law, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States. The United Nations stands
ready to support all those efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Mr. President, for your decision to
personally preside over this meeting and to express our
appreciation to the Ministers who are taking part in
this open debate. I would also like to thank the briefer,
Mr. Tor Wennesland, and through him the United
Nations, as our Organization continues trying to uphold
its sacred mandate despite repeated Israeli attacks
against the United Nations, its Secretary-General and
its personnel.
In the words of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
“the darkest moment of the Gaza conflict is
unfolding in the north of the Strip, where the
Israeli military is effectively subjugating an
entire population to bombing, siege and the risk
of starvation. The Israeli Government’s policies
and practices in northern Gaza risk emptying the
area of all Palestinians. We are facing what could
amount to atrocity crimes, including potentially
extending to crimes against humanity”.
On her part, the acting Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs concluded in the Security

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 5/28
Council recently that “the entire population of north
Gaza is at risk of dying”. Take a moment to grasp what
that means. The entire population of north Gaza is at
risk of dying. Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
are at risk of imminent death, faced with the death
penalty for refusing to leave their land.
I have sat in the Council week after week, and stood
before the General Assembly week after week, hoping
to be able to tell my people that help is on the way.
They have endured horrors that members watch on their
television screens, and yet can barely comprehend, but
their tormentors continue to be shielded, and Palestinian
victims continue to be abandoned.
There is a lot of solidarity and empathy in the
Council, in these halls and around the world. Many
countries are taking bold initiatives for justice to prevail,
and we are grateful to all of them. But as we barely
scratch the surface of ending Israeli impunity, Israel
continues committing crime after crime, defying every
rule and all States assembled in the United Nations,
betting that its will to kill and colonize will outweigh
the collective will of the international community to
save lives and achieve freedom and peace.
Palestinians are besieged, bombed and starved and
blamed for being killed. They have nowhere to go. And
they know that, if they leave, they will not be allowed
to return. Israel denies that it is implementing the very
plan members of the Council see it deploy before their
eyes. It is outraged to be accused of crimes it has already
confessed to. Israel wants to rewrite international law
to consider that indiscriminate killing; the targeting
of civilians, including humanitarians and doctors and
journalists; the use of starvation as a method of war;
arbitrary detention, abduction and torture, wilfully
causing great suffering or serious injury to body and
health; wanton destruction; forcible displacement; and
colonization are all legal as long as they are committed
by Israel. They are barbaric only if committed by others.
Israel is inventing a law that adapts to, and changes
with, the identity of the victims and the identity of the
perpetrators — a racist, supremacist, inhumane law.
Will the Council allow Israel to dehumanize us
further as part of its attempt to erase us? Will Israel
succeed in making the destruction of the Palestinian
people, starting with northern Gaza, acceptable to
the Council, or at least convince the Council that it is
inevitable and there is nothing the Council can do about
it? There is a lot that the Council can do. The Palestinian
people did not surrender; neither should the Council. I
have said that more than once, and repeat it here.
The International Court of Justice delivered
provisional orders, considering that there is a real and
imminent risk that irreparable prejudice will be caused
to rights found by the Court to be plausible, including
the right of the Palestinians in Gaza to be protected from
acts of genocide and related prohibited acts identified
in article III of the Genocide Convention. Instead of
abiding by those orders, Israel not only breached them,
but obliterated them, doubling down on its genocide.
What was a real and imminent risk 10 months ago has
become an undeniable reality today. Are States willing
now to finally denounce this genocide, especially given
Israeli crimes in northern Gaza? Are they willing to act
accordingly? If not now, when? Once there are no more
lives to save?
Israel understands that to be able to pursue its
genocidal and colonial campaign, it needs to dismantle
the international-law-based order, or to carve an Israeli
exception within it. It understands that the United
Nations, its representatives and agencies, as well as
the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court, the humanitarian community and
journalists are all obstacles on the way. It is no
coincidence that this is the conflict with the most United
Nations staff, humanitarians and journalists killed.
It is no coincidence that Israel has made outrageous
accusations and led unprecedented attacks against the
United Nations, the courts and the humanitarian and
media organizations in an attempt to intimidate and
silence them. To better besiege the Palestinians, it needs
to neutralize those who may provide them with help,
those who could shed light over the crimes against them
and those who may hold accountable those responsible.
Israel is therefore currently at war with the
United Nations — with everyone here — declaring
the Secretary-General persona non grata, killing and
maiming and detaining and torturing United Nations
staff by the hundreds, attacking United Nations
peacekeepers — including this morning in southern
Lebanon — and striving to dismantle a United Nations
agency, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The legislation passed yesterday to destroy UNRWA’s
ability to serve Palestine refugees but also its ability to
help the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza survive,
constitutes a new level in this war against the United
Nations, and an integral part of the all-out assault on the

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
6/28 24-31894
Palestinian people and their presence in their homeland.
The entire world rose to the defence of UNRWA. The
membership of the coalition to defend UNRWA at the
United Nations rose to beyond 125 Member States in
the past few months, thereby recognizing its vital role
in providing life-saving assistance to generations of
Palestinian refugees, insisting it is the backbone of the
humanitarian response in Gaza and emphasizing its role
as a pillar of regional stability and a lifeline of hope.
Yesterday countries around the world responded to
the Israeli legislation with statements of condemnation
and outrage. And yet Israel still sits among us and
utilizes its seat to incite against the United Nations
here, incitement that translates into attacks, the
killing and maiming of United Nations personnel and
the bombing of United Nations shelters and facilities
there. When will the condemnations lead to action
and accountability? When? Israel is waiting to see the
international response to its actions, and in the absence
of deterrence, Israel will move on to the next chapter
of its crimes. The genocide is possible only because
of impunity. Israel has crossed every red line, broken
every rule and defied every prohibition. When is enough
really enough? When is the Council going to act?
This seat I am sitting in belongs to the Palestinian
people, to every one of the millions of Palestinians — the
Palestinian people who are besieged, bombed and starved
as we speak. Forty-three thousand have been killed
by Israel and are accounted for; many more are
unaccounted for, buried under the rubble and in mass
graves. One hundred thousand Palestinians have been
maimed, many of them endure permanent disabilities
or amputations. Two million are displaced. Entire
communities endure successive attacks by occupation
forces and Israeli settlers. Thousands of prisoners are
arbitrarily detained, brutally assaulted, some raped
and others killed while in detention. And there is still
now no end in sight for their agony. We salute them
from this Chamber. They are the bravest among us.
When Council members speak, they should address
them — all of them, every single Palestinian — not me.
I will vacate this seat now, with one last message:
This seat is not empty. It is filled with people enduring
unspeakable pain who cannot reach the Council. The
Council has to reach them. This is the Security Council,
and it must reach every single person who is in pain
among the Palestinians. That is the Council’s duty.
Reach the child who, after being amputated and having
lost his parents, finds himself in a tent, still under the
bombs, and with nothing to eat. Reach the mother who
still talks to her little child, imagining he could still be
alive after months under the rubble. Reach the father
who left to find food for his family only to return to
find them all killed. Talk to them. Tell them what the
Council intends to do. Or tell them they are left alone to
die. Honour the memory of those killed and save those
who can still be saved — by deciding on an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire and the provision of
life-saving assistance while all efforts continue to
ensure the implementation of the Council’s resolutions;
by ending impunity and ensuring accountability; and by
finally bringing to an end this terrible injustice. Let the
Council’s actions match its words. Stop this genocide,
or forever remain silent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Just a few days ago, many here
heard the testimony delivered by freed hostage Amit
Soussana here at the United Nations. She recounted her
ordeal in chilling detail: alone, chained by the ankle,
unable to move and repeatedly sexually assaulted
by a Hamas terrorist guard. She was forced to enter
the bathroom at gunpoint, a guard subjecting her to
disturbing questions and violations, knowing full well
what was going to happen next. After the assault, she
was forbidden even to cry or show emotion. In her
appeal to Member States, she begged for urgent action
to secure the release of others still held captive, warning
against the blind eye she feels has been turned to their
suffering. Given how little the hostages are mentioned
by so many, it seems the blind eye she pleaded not to
be turned remains blind to their suffering. However,
we will not look away. We will not forget. To any
hostage who might hear me: we will never forget you,
never abandon you and never stop until you are all
safely home.
Every participant in this meeting will speak today
about the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), but I
have been speaking about UNRWA’s infiltration for
years. In the past year, we have exposed UNRWA in
Gaza as a terrorist front, camouflaged as a humanitarian
agency. Its payroll resembles a most-wanted list, rather
than an aid organization. The scandals that have
exposed UNRWA in Gaza are almost too many to
count. Nearly every time we gather here, I have new
outrageous information to share about UNRWA.

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 7/28
Less than two weeks ago (see S/PV.9750), I shared
that an UNRWA clinic was acting as a weapons
storage and launch site, disguised under the blue
banner of the United Nations. Less than a week before
that (see S/PV.9744), we exposed that the head of the
teachers union in Lebanon moonlighted as a Hamas
commander — or, more accurately, he was a Hamas
terrorist moonlighting as an UNRWA teacher. Now I
can share the details of the elimination of Mohammad
Abu Itiwi. He had been employed by UNRWA since
July 2022. It therefore cannot come as a shock that
he was also a commander in Hamas’s vile Nukhba
forces. He personally participated in, and directed
the brutal murder, rape and kidnapping of, Israeli
civilians on 7 October 2023. Let me repeat that, while
Mohammad Abu Itiwi was collecting United Nations-
funded paycheques every month, he was murdering and
kidnapping Israeli civilians. It was Mohammad Abu
Itiwi who led the savage rampage on the bomb shelter
in Re’im, in southern Israel. Dozens of young people
hid, fearing for their lives while their friends were
being raped and murdered at the Nova music festival.
Mohammad Abu Itiwi led his men in murdering almost
all of the young people hiding in the shelter and in
kidnapping the survivors. A United Nations paycheque
was waiting for him in his letterbox when he went back
to Gaza.
After we delivered justice to that terrorist, United
Nations officials had the audacity to mourn him. The
Secretary-General himself expressed outrage at his
elimination. The Secretary-General of the United
Nations condemned the death of a terrorist who
led some of the most vicious assaults on innocent
civilians in modern history. Do not misunderstand me:
it is legitimate to engage in debate. It is legitimate to
criticize us. What is entirely illegitimate is to cover
one’s eyes and to dismiss and ignore what is clearly
before them. It is illegitimate and immoral to ignore the
indisputable fact that UNRWA in Gaza has become a
front for Hamas. Yet that is exactly what the Secretary-
General is doing.
I have often spoken in this Chamber about the
necessity for moral clarity. Yet the reactions from this
institution and its leader to the elimination of a terrorist
make it clear that clarity is lost. Look at this picture.
We can see Faisal Ali Musalam Naami, in a black
shirt. He is seen loading the lifeless body of Jonathan
Samerano into his car — a grotesque trophy bound for
Gaza after his terrorist comrades murdered Jonathan
at Be’eri kibbutz. An UNRWA employee, while being
paid by the United Nations, is inside Israel. There is
also a video showing him collecting bodies and driving
them into Gaza.
When looking at that horrific image, one must
ask: how does kidnapping and killing civilians fit into
an UNRWA employee’s job description? Where in
UNRWA’s mandate is that justified? Does UNRWA’s
mandate allow it? Do UNRWA’s donors know how their
funds are being used? How can any nation or official
defend such a monster? How can anyone here allow
him to remain involved in humanitarian efforts? They
are not aid workers; they are savages who have seized
UNRWA in Gaza and transformed it into a Hamas
chapter. Those heinous criminal scandals can no longer
be swept under the rug or ignored.
The Council, the international community and the
United Nations as a whole must accept the reality that
UNRWA in Gaza is beyond redemption, beyond saving
and beyond reform. We must turn a new page now.
While our hostages continue to be tormented by
their terrorist captors in conditions we cannot begin to
imagine, and while UNRWA continues to provide cover
for terrorists, Israel has been hard at work delivering
humanitarian aid to the people of Gaza. On average,
over 100 aid trucks have entered Gaza daily for weeks.
Yet, as of last week, there were 700 trucks filled with
aid awaiting collection inside Gaza. Their contents are
rotting away in the sun.
It is clear to all those unblighted by a political agenda
that Israel has gone above and beyond its humanitarian
obligations. The problem is not the flow of aid, but
Hamas. Hamas hijacks supplies, storing or selling them
to fuel their terror machine while Gaza’s civilians are
neglected. Israel remains committed to working with
our partners to deliver aid to those in need. But as long
as Hamas exploits those resources, true humanitarian
relief cannot reach the people of Gaza.
We continue our humanitarian efforts. In particular,
we have dedicated significant attention and resources to
coordinating medical aid and assistance. Last week, the
second round of the polio vaccination campaign was
completed in southern Gaza, in collaboration with the
World Health Organization and UNICEF. That second
stage saw almost 300,000 children under the age of 10
being vaccinated, with the campaign commencing in
northern Gaza in the coming days.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
8/28 24-31894
We also continue to facilitate the transfer of
patients and medical staff to other hospitals. For
example, on 24 October, our forces facilitated the
transfer of patients — mostly children — from Kamal
Adwan Hospital to other hospitals in Gaza. We thank
our partners for their collaboration in such efforts.
While Israel meets its humanitarian obligations
in the south, fighting barbaric terrorists, we continue
to drive Hizbullah from our border, as it launched
relentless attacks against our civilians. Another civilian
was killed last night. However, it is not only our civilians
whose lives Hizbullah risks. As we operate in southern
Lebanon, our forces have located and dismantled dozens
of tunnel shafts and terrorist infrastructure, eliminated
dozens of terrorists and located massive amounts
of weapons. In one particular discovery, a weapons
store containing grenade launchers, missiles, rocket-
propelled grenades and other weapons were hidden
inside a mosque in the heart of a civilian neighbourhood
in Lebanon. Those outrageous violations of resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), as well as the basic laws
of morality and decency, cannot be overstated.
We have also proven, time and time again,
Hizbullah’s exploitation of positions of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We have
presented mountains of evidence of Hizbullah tunnels,
bases, weapons and observation posts placed within
metres of UNIFIL bases. This situation cannot continue.
UNIFIL has neglected its reporting obligations on
those flagrant violations for the past two decades.
There must be change, and that change can begin only
when we uproot Hizbullah from southern Lebanon,
while protecting Israeli and Lebanese civilians, along
with the peacekeepers themselves. The Council must
remember that the enemies we face do not care for
human life. They do not care for the wellbeing of those
they pretend to protect. They have only one aim: death
and destruction. We have been under attack from seven
fronts for more than a year now. We will continue to
carry out all the necessary operations in accordance
with international law to ensure the safe and secure
return of our 70,000 internal refugees.
As we approach the seventy-seventh anniversary
of the vote to adopt on the United Nations Partition
Plan (General Assembly resolution 181 (II)), some are
under the impression that the United Nations somehow
gifted Israel to the Jewish people and that that gift
must now be placed under a microscope. But make
no mistake — the United Nations gifted us nothing.
The land of Israel has been our homeland for more
than 3,000 years. Resolution 181 (II)) was accepted
by Israel but rejected immediately by the Arab States.
Not only was it rejected, but it was also used as an
opportunity to launch an invasion. They had every
intention to wipe us from the face of the Earth. Yet it
was our strength, resilience and commitment that saved
us from extermination. Today that very same strength,
resilience and commitment empowers us once more,
driving us to stand against the barbarism and evil that
seeks to destroy us again.
Members must not forget that Israel was forged
through our sacrifice and blood — not by their words.
While our State is no longer an infant, it still faces
new and constant threats from those who desire our
extinction. The international community should correct
historic wrongs and support us in our efforts to defend
our State and people. It must not continue to unfairly
scrutinize Israel and enable the terrorists who still hold
our civilians hostage to this day.
In conclusion, I would like to ask each of the members
of the Council to take a moment — not now, but later
today, when they go back to their residences — to put
themselves in our shoes. I ask each of them to imagine
for a minute their country surrounded on all sides
by enemies, attacking their people, families and
homes with the aim of destroying them — and to ask
themselves frankly, what would they do?
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Federal Councillor and
Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
of Switzerland.
Violence continues to beget more violence in Israel,
Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, in a spiral
that is now spreading throughout the region. That has
been the nature of the conflict for decades, and it has
unfortunately become even worse since Hamas’s acts
of terror against Israel on 7 October 2023. Since then,
we have completely lost our sense of humanity. Since
then, the Security Council has adopted four resolutions
on this matter, all of which Switzerland supported. They
call for the immediate and unconditional release of the
hostages, a ceasefire in Gaza, respect for international
law, the protection of civilians and unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance. Yet not one of those resolutions
has been implemented, which undermines the credibility
of the Council. All actors — State and non-State actors
alike — are regularly violating the Geneva Conventions

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 9/28
and international law in general. That is unacceptable.
More than a year after 7 October 2023, Hamas still holds
97 hostages and continues to commit indiscriminate
hostilities against Israel. More than a year after those
acts of terror, it has not been possible to prevent the
conflict from spreading in region.
It is becoming a meaningless exercise to call
again and again on the parties to the conflict to
respect and implement the decisions of the Council.
That is a genuine tragedy, given the growing need to
implement our decisions. Making appeals to the parties
is of little use if all of us, both in this Chamber and
on the battlefield, fail to shoulder our responsibilities,
which is our obligation as signatories to the Geneva
Conventions. We need robust willingness from all the
high contracting parties to guarantee a greater regard
for humanity in this war. On 18 September, Switzerland
welcomed the General Assembly’s decision to organize
in Geneva a conference of the high contracting parties on
the implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
relating to the protection of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. My
country is preparing to take on that task.
The time has come to find a way out of this conflict.
Yesterday’s decision by the Israeli Parliament against the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) marks a new
turning point in the conflict. Not only is that decision
largely incompatible with international law, but it also
threatens the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
suffering civilian population — assistance provided
to this day by UNRWA. Switzerland expects Israel to
fulfil its obligations under international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law. Switzerland will continue to help
the civilian population, in line with my country’s
humanitarian tradition. But humanitarian assistance is
not a lasting solution to this conflict. I firmly believe
that peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
through political means — or not at all. The time
has therefore come for those countries committed to
finding such a solution to step up their efforts. In our
view, a ceasefire agreement with phases covering the
short-term, medium-term and long-term is a concrete
possibility. Switzerland continues to believe that a two-
State political solution is also possible and desirable.
The aim of any political solution is to offer Israelis
and Palestinians the prospect of living in peace and
security. Leaving the situation to succumb to violence
and destruction is not an alternative worthy of the
values we represent here in the Council. And neither is
it an alternative that is compatible with our humanity.
Let us then work towards a political solution with
the parties to the conflict, the States of the region
that are committed to the two-State solution and the
members of the Council. Switzerland welcomes every
initiative to that end. I will mention three of them but
there are more — mediation by the United States,
Qatar and Egypt for the release of the hostages and a
ceasefire in Gaza; the launch of the Global Alliance
for the Implementation of the Two-State Solution
on 26 September here in New York — tomorrow we
will participate in the first follow-up meeting in
Riyadh — and France’s initiative for a political solution
to the alarming situation in Lebanon. My country
calls on all parties to conflicts to engage in good faith
in negotiations and respect their obligations under
international law.
We are also here to reaffirm the central role of the
United Nations in peace, stability and humanitarian
assistance in the region. Every United Nations agency
must be able to do its job and help people in need.
The Secretary-General must be able to speak without
hindrance with all parties. Any unilateral attempt to
weaken its mandate only weakens multilateralism,
which we created to guarantee peace and security in
the world — a world in which Switzerland is ready to
play its part.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Guyana.
Mr. Todd (Guyana): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
The war in Gaza has set several new and
unacceptable bars, among them a rapid decline in
the nutritional status of the population in Gaza not
seen elsewhere on the globe and the highest number
of humanitarian workers killed in a single conflict
globally. Furthermore, more women and children have
been killed in this Gaza war than in any other recent
conflict in a single year. We have witnessed, too often,
the tragic irony of sophisticated precision weaponry
striking innocent human beings, instead of military
targets — women, children, the elderly, the disabled
and aid workers, their life cut short, extinguished amid
the rubble of homes, schools, hospitals and places of

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
10/28 24-31894
worship. More than 42,000 persons have been killed,
and more than 100, 000 injured; among the dead are at
least 13,000 children, nearly 1,000 of them below the
age of 1 year.
Guyana remains deeply troubled by the ongoing
situation in northern Gaza, where the population has
been under siege and subject to a bombing campaign
for more than three weeks. We share the concern of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights that the Israeli military action in the
northernmost governorate of Gaza may be causing the
destruction of the Palestinian population. We call on
Israel to comply with its obligations under international
law regarding the protection of the inhabitants of the
territory, which it is illegally occupying, as determined
by the International Court of Justice.
All this is happening in full glare through an
unprecedented flow of information, in real time, about
the atrocities being perpetrated. The world today is
much better positioned than we were 30 years ago, for
example, to act based on real-time information. Against
that reality, inaction in the face of such overwhelming
human suffering, to which we are witness every single
day, cannot be justified. Guyana appeals to the Council
to unite to halt the unceasing onslaught on Palestinians
in Gaza and help de-escalate and stabilize the situation
in the wider Middle East. To do otherwise would be to
abrogate our primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The hopes for peace of Palestinians are being
extinguished even as the risks to peace for Israelis
continue to mount. We are concerned that prospects for
the future of peace in the Middle East will be further
endangered if this persistent cycle of violence and
recrimination is not curtailed. We also caution against
the perils attendant upon the “othering” of a people,
which, as history has shown, could engender the most
egregious violations of their human rights. The Security
Council, aided by international law, has a duty to act on
the side of peace and justice and in favour of the two-
State solution.
The bills passed in the Israeli Parliament yesterday
regarding the operations of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) in the occupied Palestinian territory
give cause for grave concern. They risk compounding
the oppression of the Palestinian people. Should
UNRWA be dismantled, the implications would be
devastating for the millions of Palestinians who
depend on its life-saving services in the absence of an
independent Palestinian State. UNRWA’s mandate was
created by the General Assembly and can therefore be
altered only by that body. We urge careful consideration
by all concerned of the implications of unilateral action
in this sensitive case.
I conclude by underscoring the following
three points.
First, achieving a ceasefire is now more urgent than
ever before, and the Security Council must immediately
rise to the occasion.
Secondly, it is equally urgent to secure the release
of Israeli hostages in Gaza, as well as the release of
Palestinian civilians, including children who have been
arbitrarily detained in Israel.
Thirdly, we must urgently address the unprecedented
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Guyana is particularly
disturbed about what is taking place in northern Gaza,
where the level of food insecurity is compromising
people’s immune systems, subjecting them to wasting
and other intolerable forms of suffering. Children are
bearing the brunt of acute malnutrition, and famine is
all but confirmed. Let us act now to end this war and
the suffering of the Palestinian people. Our common
humanity demands it.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Representative of the United States and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his sobering briefing.
I do not know how many people in this Chamber
have watched a child die of starvation. I have. It was
nearly three decades ago, but it is the kind of memory
that one does not forget — her rib bones poking out
from under her skin, bloated belly and gaunt eyes. And
I remember her mother’s eyes filled with despair.
I think about her as we have seen reports that no
food assistance has reached Jabalia or Beit Lahiya since
early October. I think about the ribs, the bellies and
the eyes of children in northern Gaza and about their
parents, themselves having gone days without food,
desperate to save them.
The unimaginable suffering was set in motion by
Hamas on 7 October 2023, and the United States has not

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 11/28
been shy about criticizing the Security Council’s failure
to condemn Hamas’s atrocities and repeated violations
of international law. Many on the Council have not done
so as of yet. At the same time, the United States has
made clear to Prime Minister Netanyahu that, one year
into the conflict, Israel must address the catastrophic
humanitarian crisis in Gaza; that the United States
rejects any Israeli efforts to starve Palestinians in
Jabalia, or anywhere else; and that Israel’s words must
be matched by action on the ground. Right now, that
is not happening. That must change immediately. The
United States has stated clearly that Israel must allow
food, medicine and other supplies into all of Gaza,
especially the north and especially as winter sets in,
and protect the workers distributing it.
In that regard, I reiterate our deep concerns
about legislation adopted by the Knesset regarding
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). There
is no denying the fact that some UNRWA personnel
were involved in the 7 October attacks. The Council
heard directly from families of hostages taken into
Gaza by UNRWA staff, as we just heard from the
Israeli Ambassador. UNRWA itself has confirmed
that there were some Hamas members found among
its personnel. In addition — although we acknowledge
the steps UNRWA has taken to implement the reforms
outlined in the Colonna report — we need the progress
to accelerate. And we call on the Secretary-General to
create a mechanism to review and address allegations
that UNRWA personnel have ties to Hamas and other
terrorist groups. At the same time, we know that, right
now, there is no alternative to UNRWA when it comes
to delivering food and other life-saving aid in Gaza.
Therefore, we have concerns about the legislation being
implemented. Instead of speaking at one another, Israel
and the United Nations must speak to one another to
address the fears that led to the Knesset’s legislation
and ensure that UNRWA can fulfil its critical mandate
and rebuild confidence in its mission and the hundreds
of staff members who are not associated with Hamas.
In addition, as President Biden has reiterated,
Israel must conduct its operations in Gaza in a way
that protects civilians and adheres to international
law. Efforts by the Israeli Government to facilitate
humanitarian assistance is appreciated, but much more
has to be done. We all know that Hamas uses schools,
hospitals and ambulances to hide weapons and fighters.
But harrowing reports of medical staff being arrested
by Israeli forces at hospitals in northern Gaza are also
deeply troubling. We urge Israel to publicly address
those allegations immediately, and we reiterate that
there must be no forcible displacement, no reoccupation
and no territorial reduction of Gaza.
In addition to sounding the alarm over the urgent
humanitarian situation in Gaza, we must also not ignore
the rising violence in the West Bank. Israeli authorities
must intervene when extremist settlers launch attacks
and must hold perpetrators to account. The United
States will continue to impose sanctions on actors who
commit or enable violent activities or foment extreme
instability and violence against civilians in the West
Bank. What is more, the United States has been clear:
the Israeli Government’s settlement programme is
inconsistent with international law and harmful to the
prospect of a two-State solution. So too is undermining
the West Bank’s economy. We urge Israel to release
withheld clearance revenues and extend waivers for
Israeli banks, thereby helping maintain correspondent
banking relationships with their Palestinian
counterparts, especially given the assessments that
those institutions can adequately prevent money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
I know that it feels impossible with so much
suffering now to think about the day after, but we
must reject the false choice between alleviating pain
today and preventing it tomorrow. The elimination of
Sinwar, along with much of Hamas’s senior leadership
and terrorist infrastructure, presents an opportunity
for the parties to re-engage and, most important,
finalize a ceasefire deal with hostage release consistent
with resolution 2735 (2024), to begin taking steps to
achieve a day after in Gaza without Hamas in power
terrorizing Israelis and Palestinians alike and work
towards a political settlement that provides a better
future for Israelis and Palestinians. Let me just say here
that diplomacy does work, but it takes a lot of work to
get there. And we have to continue to put our efforts
behind the diplomatic efforts that are currently being
pursued. We have the urgent responsibility to stop the
suffering of Palestinian civilians and secure the release
of hostages, to alleviate their suffering and that of their
families, make the most of this moment and ensure that
the parties to the conflict do the same.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council. We extend our sincere
thanks to Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
12/28 24-31894
For more than one year, the Middle East, and
Palestine in particular, has been gripped by worsening
violence. The brutal Israeli aggression escalates daily,
spilling over into Lebanon, Syria and beyond, posing a
real threat to regional stability, as well as international
peace and security. We witness entire communities
facing death, starvation, outbreaks of disease, lands
desecrated and international law rendered meaningless.
Indeed, the framework that our predecessors built
after the Second World War is crumbling before our
eyes, unable to stand against an Israeli Power, shielded
from accountability and enjoying total impunity.
Today, unfortunately, we live in a world where might
overwhelms right.
As stated in different reliable reports, and confirmed
by Mr. Wennesland in his briefing today, the situation
in northern Gaza is beyond catastrophic. Just yesterday,
in Gaza, Israeli forces struck a building in Bayt Lahya,
leaving at least 60 Palestinians killed, including at
least 25 children. To grasp the unprecedented level of
destruction in Gaza, one needs only to look at The New
York Times today: it is hard to find in Gaza a single
building that remains undamaged. That destruction is
not driven by military objectives but rather reflects an
Israeli policy aimed at forcibly displacing Palestinians
from their homes.
As one staff member of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) described, people in northern Gaza are
waiting for death. They are feeling abandoned, hopeless
and alone. For three weeks now, relentless bombing has
denied even United Nations staff access to food and
medical care. And the healthcare system in Gaza is on
the brink of collapse. Kamal Adwan Hospital, which
suffered several bombardments, is barely functioning,
without a blood unit, shrouds or basic medical supplies.
As the Hospital Director said, they were expecting
humanitarian aid to arrive, as promised by the
international community, as promised by the Security
Council, but only Israeli tanks came instead. Amid that
crisis, the polio vaccination campaign is halted now,
leaving children unprotected.
Furthermore, in the south of Gaza, conditions
are not better. Worse still, the situation is rapidly
deteriorating as the Israeli occupation weaponizes
starvation against civilians, especially children, by
denying them essential food. According to verified
figures, in the past year, more than 200,000 aid trucks
were barred from entering Gaza. That is the real face
of an Israeli occupation that treats Palestinians as less
than human beings.
UNRWA, the lifeline of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians, faces relentless attacks by the occupying
Power. There have been 231 staff members of UNRWA
killed; 190 premises of UNRWA were bombarded by
the Israeli army; and now, the operations of UNRWA
are at risk of being completely halted. Just yesterday,
the Israeli authorities adopted two bills aimed at
halting UNRWA activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Algeria firmly condemns that decision and
recalls that UNRWA operates under a mandate from the
General Assembly, warranting our collective defence
and support. UNRWA is irreplaceable. UNRWA is
indispensable. It must continue to serve as a lifeline for
Palestinian refugees until a just and political solution is
achieved, establishing an independent Palestinian State.
An enemy of transparency and accountability,
the Israeli authority is attempting now to obscure the
truth after outright denying its crime. It has even dared
to threaten our multilateral bodies dealing with its
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
Some of those multilateral bodies regrettably have
succumbed to that pressure. As the global conscience
increasingly rejects images of death and destruction,
calling for an end of the Israeli occupier’s unchecked
actions, suppressing those images from the media, from
reaching the world, has become a priority of the Israeli
authority. In fact, the occupying Power endeavours
relentlessly to hide its crime from scrutiny and from
international justice. Foreign journalists are now
barred from entering Gaza not for one week, not for
one month, but for more than one year. Moreover, the
few Palestinian journalists who remains in northern
Gaza find themselves in the crosshairs of the Israeli
occupation. Just last week, six journalists were accused
of being terrorists by night to justify their killing later.
That policy, which we have seen used, cost the lives of
already more than 168 journalists in Gaza and now tens
of them in Lebanon.
That cruel reality was exposed by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, who said, “targeting journalists is a strategy
by Israeli authorities to obstruct the documentation of
crimes”. Yet, the truth cannot be erased. Its light breaks
through, clear for all to see. But where are the voices of
those who once claimed to be champions of freedom of

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 13/28
speech, of freedom of information? Why this silence in
the face of such blatant transgressions?
Unfortunately, our recent deliberations have reduced
Palestinian suffering and nightmares into a mere count
of aid trucks. However, the source of the suffering of
the Palestinian people is not just a humanitarian crisis;
it is a political crisis rooted in decades of occupation
and oppression, dating back to the Nakba. In that
regard, the international community’s failure to uphold
their inalienable rights has deepened this tragedy. The
core issue is the occupation. Only by addressing that
root cause can we hope for just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Let us work together to impose an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire in Gaza and
Lebanon and to launch a genuine peace process that
brings an end to the occupation of Arab lands.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his briefing.
Since the horrendous terrorist attacks by Hamas
on 7 October of last year, the international community
has been witnessing an unprecedented humanitarian
catastrophe and challenges to the regional order.
Violations of international law are happening each
and every day. Civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, are being targeted.
Israeli hostages are still held in Gaza. The delivery of
humanitarian aid is not being ensured, as hunger surges.
The relentless expansion of settlements in the West
Bank, along with worsening violence and impunity, are
slicing up Palestinian land and threatening the viability
of the two-State solution.
This Organization, the United Nations, per se,
is under severe attack. The United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon has suffered repeated attacks from
Israeli acts that constitute violations of international
humanitarian law. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is confronted with existential challenges
and has seen 233 of its humanitarian workers killed in
Gaza in the past year.
International humanitarian law must be observed
at all times. The Republic of Korea expresses its
grave concern, once again, over escalatory Israeli
attacks killing and wounding innocent civilians.
We are particularly disturbed by attacks on civilians
in besieged northern Gaza, as aid is blocked, polio
vaccination has been delayed, and hungry families are
being forced to flee south at gunpoint. The Republic of
Korea also condemns the use of civilians and civilian
infrastructure for military purposes by both Hamas and
the Israel Defense Forces.
Moreover, yesterday’s approval by the Knesset of
the two bills against UNRWA is extremely alarming.
It is Israel’s obligation, under the Charter of the United
Nations, to assist and grant privileges and immunities
for the activities of the Organization. With the collapse
of UNRWA, 2 million Palestinians in Gaza will suffer
even more. In the long term too, the reality without
UNRWA is unacceptable, as the Agency has provided
essential services, including healthcare, to millions
of Palestinian refugees in Gaza, the West Bank and
beyond for decades.
Let us be clear: UNRWA is indispensable. Israel’s
actions against UNRWA will have a devastating impact
on Israel’s relations with countries of the region and
the international community. The Republic of Korea,
along with the vast majority of United Nations Member
States, therefore urges Israel, as a decades-long Member
of the United Nations, to act more responsibly and to
immediately stop all measures to dismantle UNRWA.
An immediate ceasefire in Gaza, along with
the immediate release of hostages, as well as rapid
de-escalation in the region, are not only an option,
but the only way to save thousands of lives and open a
new pathway towards regional stability and long-term
peaceful coexistence based on the two-State solution.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome your participation,
Mr. President, in the Security Council’s quarterly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
We would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing and assessment of the situation in the
Middle East in the context of the unprecedented uptick
in pan-regional confrontation and violence, at the
centre of which lies the most long-standing regional
conflict — the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Over a year ago, the flames of war in the Gaza
Strip flared up with renewed intensity, and the current
escalation has become the bloodiest in the long line
of Arab-Israeli wars. The number of dead, wounded
and missing has exceeded 150,000, and it continues to
rise unabated. Most of the victims are peaceful Gazan

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
14/28 24-31894
civilians, the majority of which are women, children
and the elderly. Day in day out, we receive reports of
air strikes on refugee and internally displaced persons
camps in northern Gaza. The latest Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) attack on Beit Lahia of 26 October killed
at least 49 people and injured more than 80. Amid the
hostilities and Israel’s blockade, the enclave is facing
a genuine humanitarian disaster, accompanied by
widespread starvation, outbreaks of infectious diseases
and total destruction of civilian infrastructure. The
number of refugees and repeatedly displaced persons
runs into the millions.
The dire situation persists in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. There are military raids by
the Israeli army and ongoing clashes between local
residents and settlers. Since 7 October, the number of
detained Palestinians in the West Bank has exceeded
11,000 people. According to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mirjana
Spoljaric Egger, the Israeli military operation has
completely changed the very nature of the conflict
towards dehumanization and stripping civilians of their
human dignity.
Direct threats and the use of force by Israel against
the United Nations and its specialized agencies have
become a hallmark of the current crisis. Some 310
aid workers, including 231 staff of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), were killed during
the year-long military operation in the Strip. That
represents the largest loss of life in the history of the
United Nations. Ever since its foundation in 1949, the
Agency has been uniquely entrusted with protecting
the rights of Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territories and providing assistance to them there and
in neighbouring Arab countries. As the backbone of
the United Nations humanitarian wing in the region,
for decades, the Agency has been the main provider
of life-saving aid to Palestinians, not only in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank but also in Lebanon, Jordan
and Syria. Today, however, UNRWA is on the brink of
being completely disbanded, as yesterday the Knesset
passed bills prohibiting it from operating and revoking
its staff’s immunities.
Since the beginning of the active phase of Israel’s
campaign against UNRWA, we have repeatedly stated
that an end to its operations would have the most
deleterious repercussions for the region and for the
United Nations system as a whole. An extremely grave
precedent, which undermines the very foundations
of international multilateral cooperation, is being set
before our very eyes in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations. In fact, Israel has
singlehandedly decided to abolish a United Nations
specialized agency that is not to its liking. Amid a rapid
deterioration in the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and a financial crisis sparked by the United
States withholding of aid to UNRWA, yesterday’s
decision by the Knesset risks bringing the Agency’s
activities to a definitive end — something that Israel
has precisely been seeking for decades.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s statement
that UNRWA is irreplaceable and that there is simply
no alternative to it. At the same time, we are witnessing
horrific events taking place in the Gaza Strip: Gazans
are being deprived of their last lifeline, and we all
know the answer to the question as to whether the
Israeli authorities are able and willing to assume
responsibility for delivering assistance to Palestinians
in need. Over the past few weeks, we have heard United
Nations representatives say, time and again, that they
have no plan B, should UNRWA be forcibly disbanded.
The likelihood of those laws not being enforced is close
to nil. Further actions do not need to be referred to as a
plan B, but what the international community is simply
duty-bound to do is to continue to support Gazans at
all costs and protect the 13,000 UNRWA staff in Gaza.
Moreover, Israel’s actions to end UNRWA’s presence
in the occupied Palestinian territory run counter
to its obligations as an occupying Power and to the
undertakings it made upon being admitted to the United
Nations, including the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), on the right of Palestinian
refugees to return and to receive compensation.
As we have stated on numerous occasions,
there is, and can be, no justification for the attack
perpetrated by Hamas last year; we all condemned
it and we will continue to do so. At the same time,
there is no justification for what ensued, namely,
the collective punishment of millions of Palestinian
civilians. But Israel did not stop there, and now, with
the tacit endorsement of Washington, it continues to
stoke a full-scale regional confrontation. The spiral of
violence has already extended far beyond the occupied
Palestinian territory, destabilizing the situation in the
Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 15/28
As of late September, West Jerusalem opened a
second front in Lebanon, announcing the launch of an
offensive operation, “Northern Arrows”, with the stated
objective of undermining the military infrastructure of
the Hizbullah movement. We are receiving numerous
reports of civilian deaths caused by the IDF’s massive
indiscriminate strikes on densely populated residential
areas of Beirut and other Lebanese cities. Many
journalists and media workers are among the dead and
wounded civilians. In the night between 24 and 25 of
October, the Israeli Air Force launched air strikes on a
residential sector in the town of Hasbaya, in southern
Lebanon, killing two staff from Al-Mayadeen TV
and one cameraman from Al-Manar TV. The other
day, Israelis also attacked Al-Mayadeen’s Beirut
office. West Jerusalem regards casualties among
civilians — and journalists are civilians — as a form
of collateral damage. In that connection, I would
like to remind Council members that, according to
preliminary estimates, over the past year, dozens of
journalists have been killed in southern Lebanon, and
since the military operation in the Gaza Strip began,
some 140 media workers have been killed in the line of
duty. The obvious conclusion to be drawn here is that
Israel’s deliberate strategy is to hunt down journalists
who undermine West Jerusalem’s monopoly on the
narrative about what is happening.
The Israeli invasion of Lebanon has also
endangered the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) contingent, which was deployed
at the official request of Beirut in line with Security
Council decisions, the latest being resolution 2749
(2024), adopted unanimously in August. Regardless of
that, between 10 and 17 October alone, the IDF attacked
the Blue Helmets’ positions several times, including
with tanks and toxic ammunition, claiming at least
20 casualties. We therefore concur with the United
Nations assessment that the frequency and nature of
such attacks show that Israel is wilfully seeking to
endanger the lives and safety of peacekeepers with the
aim of forcing them to withdraw. At the same time,
the Israeli leadership is unequivocally demanding the
peacekeepers’ withdrawal, in disregard of the fact
that such a decision can be taken only by the Security
Council — the sole organ empowered to determine the
mandate and modalities of UNIFIL’s activities — and
by the Government of Lebanon, the country hosting the
peacekeepers on its territory.
The ongoing crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territory and Lebanon has been the catalyst of a dramatic
escalation in the widening confrontation with Jordan,
Egypt, Iraq, Syria and Yemen, which is teetering on
the brink. And now the United States-Israeli duo is
doing its utmost to draw Iran into direct confrontation
too. Yesterday in the Chamber (see S/PV.9762) we
discussed in detail the disastrous consequences that
that eventuality could have for the stability and security
of the region as a whole. We have repeatedly stated that
the root causes of the recurrent outbreaks of violence lie
in the failure to settle the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on
the basis of the well-known decisions by the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
Since the start of this unprecedented crisis, the
General Assembly and the Security Council have
adopted a number of resolutions aimed at de-escalating
the violence in Gaza. Yet, to date, they all remain a dead
letter. And it is an open secret that, to this day, it has
been impossible to implement those decisions simply
because of the position of just one country — the United
States — which is not only providing international
diplomatic cover for Israel, but also dutifully
supplying it with weapons and intelligence. In doing
so, Washington is paralysing the work of the Council,
preventing it from adopting any decisions that could in
any way rein in its Middle Eastern ally. Instead, our
American colleagues are imposing their own ideas on
Council members — ideas that have not even garnered
the support of the Israelis, whose interests they are
supposed to serve. I am referring to the so-called “Biden
plan” on Gaza, which failed, and to the initiative to
secure a ceasefire in Lebanon, which the Israeli Prime
Minister rejected out of hand.
Our American colleagues must stop sabotaging
the Council’s new initiatives. And the latest votes in
the General Assembly suggest that that is precisely
what the overwhelming majority of the United Nations
States Members expect of them. Do more than 40,000
Palestinian deaths not suffice to compel Washington
to cooperate with the rest of the Council? After all, as
we have seen time and time again, unilateral attempts
to reconcile Israel with its neighbours without a just
solution to the Palestinian question will not bring peace
to the Middle East but lead only to a further cycle of
escalation, akin to the one now gripping the region.
There is no doubt that Israelis have a right to ensure
their security, but the path to that goal lies solely in
a comprehensive Middle East settlement process and

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
16/28 24-31894
the realization of the Palestinians’ legitimate right to
have a State of their own within 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. To that end, the relevant
decisions of the Security Council must be implemented
to stem the widespread bloodshed in the region and
to prevent the Middle East from being engulfed by a
major war. We urge all the parties involved — in the
region and beyond — to exercise restraint, to end the
violence and to avert a catastrophe. If we want to secure
a peaceful future for Palestinian, Lebanese, Syrian and
Israeli children, we must act now; we must not dither,
lest the poison of violence and revenge contaminate the
entire Middle East for years upon years and the region
continue to lurch from one crisis to crisis.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
The Security Council must take action to put an
end to the regional escalation. There is an urgent need
to establish an immediate and permanent ceasefire
in Gaza. That is the only way to put an end to the
humanitarian disaster. All hostages must be released
without delay. France condemns Israel’s strikes
on civilian infrastructure, which constitute grave
violations of the Geneva Conventions. We call on Israel
to ensure the protection of all civilians and to lift any
impediments to the delivery of aid.
France expresses its deep concern about the
extreme gravity of the situation in northern Gaza,
where famine is already raging. We recall that any
forced displacement constitutes a serious violation of
international law. France has consistently condemned
the terrorist attacks and sexual violence committed by
Hamas and other terrorist groups on 7 October 2023. We
recall our unwavering commitment to Israel’s security.
On 26 October, Israel carried out strikes on military
sites in Iran. They were conducted in response to Iran’s
attack on Israel on 1 October. It is imperative for all
the parties involved to refrain from any escalation or
action likely to worsen the context of extreme tension
prevailing in the region.
In the West Bank and East Jerusalem, Israel must
put an end to its settlement policy, which is illegal. The
settlers’ policy of terror must cease. France condemns
violations of the historic status quo at the holy sites
in East Jerusalem and the provocations and unilateral
measures in the West Bank. We support a reformed
Palestinian Authority that is capable of exercising its
responsibilities throughout the Palestinian territories,
including in the Gaza Strip. France will continue its
efforts to implement the two-State solution and will
remain proactive, including in the Security Council,
with its partners.
In Lebanon too, we need an immediate ceasefire.
There is an urgent need to fully implement resolution
1701 (2006) in order to achieve a long-term solution
along the Blue Line that ensures respect for the security
of both Israel and Lebanon. At the initiative of the
President of the French Republic, France organized
the International Conference in Support of Lebanon’s
People and Sovereignty on 24 October in Paris, together
with the United Nations. Participating States responded
to the United Nations appeal and pledged $1 billion
in aid, including $800 million in humanitarian aid
and $200 million to support the Lebanese security
forces. France pledged €100 million and 100 tons of
humanitarian cargo.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is facing an existential threat following yesterday’s
adoption by the Knesset of two laws. France calls on
Israel not to criminalize the Agency’s activities and to
respect its international obligations vis à vis UNRWA
and the United Nations. France reaffirms its support
for UNRWA.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I welcome your convening
of this important meeting of the Security Council,
Mr. President. I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his sobering briefing.
One destructive year has passed. Japan renews its
unequivocal and strong condemnation of the heinous
terror attacks and hostage-taking by Hamas and others
on 7 October 2023. Since then, Gaza’s agony has been
deepening: tens of thousands of civilians have been
killed and injured, and the population, including the
hostages, are enduring unimaginable horrors.
The longer the conflict in Gaza persists, the more
innocent civilians will be victimized, the more the
hostages will suffer and have their lives endangered,
the worse the humanitarian situation will become and
the greater the risk will be of the conflict spreading to
the wider region. Therefore, Japan once again strongly
demands an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and the release
of all remaining hostages. We support resolution 2735
(2024) and remain hopeful that the tireless diplomacy
of the United States, Egypt and Qatar will achieve a
breakthrough soon.

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 17/28
In the meantime, we must save the most vulnerable,
particularly those in northern Gaza, who are facing
siege, bombardment, evacuation orders and starvation.
The delay in the polio vaccine campaign in the north
is also deeply worrisome. Moreover, Japan is gravely
concerned about the Knesset bills adopted yesterday,
which severely restrict the operations of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), an agency indispensable
in sustaining the lives of Palestinian citizens and
refugees. Any further humanitarian tragedies cannot
be tolerated, and preventing them is the responsibility
of all States Members of the United Nations. While we
need to monitor the reform of UNRWA, maintaining
the function of UNRWA is a part of that responsibility.
Beyond Gaza, the situation in the West Bank
remains serious. We call on the Israeli Government to
fully freeze settlement activities and take appropriate
measures to prevent continued extremist settler
violence. A revitalized Palestinian Authority (PA) is
critical to restoring peace and stability for both Israel and
Palestine. Therefore, we the international community
should assist in reforming the PA, both politically and
financially. For decades, Japan has provided necessary
assistance to the PA. What we have offered is not just
resources or projects, but a hope for a peaceful future.
We remain steadfastly committed to that end.
Japan is deeply concerned about the exchanges
of attacks among regional actors, including the latest
attack by Israel against Iranian military facilities,
and strongly condemns any action that escalates the
already volatile situation. All parties should exercise
maximum restraint. In Lebanon, fighting between
the Israel Defense Forces and Hizbullah continues,
affecting civilians on both sides of the Blue Line. More
than 2,000 people have been killed since last year, and
more than 1 million people have been forced to flee
their homes. Many have crossed into Syria. The crisis
is spreading.
To prevent further escalation, we reiterate our
call for an immediate ceasefire between Israel
and Hizbullah and urge all parties to make sincere
efforts to reach a diplomatic settlement. Significantly
increasing the flow of humanitarian assistance is vital
in addressing the needs of people in Lebanon, who
are suffering at this very moment. Japan has recently
decided to extend an emergency grant of $10 million
for humanitarian assistance to the people in Lebanon.
Today we also decided to provide an additional
$10 million in response to the humanitarian situation
in Syria, which has witnessed the influx of displaced
persons from Lebanon.
Lastly, Japan reiterates that only a two-State
solution can finally resolve this conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved through belligerence, but only
through diplomacy.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing today.
The death of Hamas’s leader, who had the blood of
innocent Israelis and Palestinians on his hands, must
be a turning point in this dreadful conflict, which has
now claimed more than 43,000 lives in Gaza. This is
the time to urgently secure a ceasefire in Gaza and the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages,
who have suffered in inhumane conditions for more
than a year.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is horrific.
Acute malnutrition is now a reality for many. This
month, the least aid has entered Gaza since the
beginning of the conflict, and the situation in northern
Gaza is especially alarming. Gazans have been asked to
evacuate the north in their hundreds of thousands; but
there is nowhere safe to go. In recent weeks, just as we
have seen throughout the conflict, Israeli strikes have
hit designated humanitarian zones. On Thursday, we
saw again profoundly distressing scenes after an Israeli
strike on Al-Shuhada — a school-turned shelter in the
Nuseirat refugee camp, which killed at least 17 people,
including nine children. We remain very concerned
too about the severe impact of those strikes on civilian
infrastructure, including health-care facilities, which
face critical shortages in medical supplies, food
and water.
Israel must comply fully with international
humanitarian law. As my Prime Minister has said, the
world will not tolerate any more excuses from Israel
on humanitarian assistance. There is no justification
for denying civilians access to essential supplies. The
Government of Israel must do more to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure and allow aid to be delivered
safely and at scale. Related to that, reports that United
Nations agencies have had to postpone the rollout of
the polio vaccine campaign in northern Gaza are deeply
disturbing. Israeli authorities must allow aid workers to
carry out that work safely and securely.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
18/28 24-31894
We also unequivocally reject attempts to undermine
or degrade the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA),
which is the backbone of the humanitarian response
in Gaza and a lifeline for hundreds of thousands of
civilians there and in the wider region. The allegations
against UNRWA staff earlier this year were fully
investigated. There is no justification for cutting off ties
with UNRWA. Israel must abide by its obligations and
ensure UNRWA that can continue its life-saving work.
We reiterate that northern Gaza must not be cut off
from the south. Palestinian civilians, including those
evacuated from northern Gaza, must be permitted to
return. There must be no forcible transfer of Gazans
from or within Gaza, or any reduction in the territory
of the Gaza Strip. Civilians must be protected. In the
West Bank, the level of illegal settlement expansion
and settler violence is unprecedented. Israel must take
action now to address that.
A sustainable solution to the crisis cannot and
will not be achieved through unilateral action. The
international community and the Council have been
clear and unified in our commitment to the two-State
solution, which is the only viable path to a long-term
peaceful solution. The Palestinian and Israeli people
alike have a right to self-determination, safety and
security, and we must all work together to provide a
credible and irreversible pathway towards a two-
State solution.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): We welcome your
presiding over the Council today, Sir, which
demonstrates the importance that Switzerland attaches
to the responsibility of the Council in the current tragic
crisis in the Middle East. I also want to thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his commitment and for
his briefing today.
Slovenia is horrified by the level of death, injury,
destruction and suffering in all of Gaza. We are
shocked, watching the most devastating bombardment
of a civilian population and civilian infrastructure
since the Second World War. We are shocked by
reports of severely maimed children, left to die in Gaza
because their transfer for treatment abroad was denied
by Israel. We are shocked by information on health
workers being detained and others being prevented
from saving people’s lives. We are shocked by the fact
that everything is lacking — food, life-saving health
care and shelter. But first and foremost, we are shocked
by the lack of humanity.
We recall that collective punishment and starvation
are prohibited as a method of warfare. We reject
forced displacement. As violations continue, we
repeat our call for full respect for international law,
including international humanitarian and international
human rights law. We repeat our call on Israel to
allow unimpeded access to the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations. We call for aid to be
delivered at scale. Famine is at the doors of Gaza. Once
famine is declared, it is already too late. We furthermore
call for the establishment of adequate conditions for the
finalization of the polio vaccination campaign, which
has been postponed.
Instead of steps being taken to alleviate human
suffering, it seems steps are taken to augment it. We
denounce the passing of legislation on the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the Knesset.
If implemented, it would have a severe impact on the
work of UNRWA in Gaza, the West Bank, Lebanon
and potentially in the region. UNRWA is the backbone
of the humanitarian response in Gaza and a lifeline
for Palestinian refugees. That was reaffirmed in the
shared commitments on UNRWA, which have garnered
the support of 123 signatories, including all members
of the Security Council. The full implications of the
laws have yet to be analysed. However, in our view,
their implementation would constitute a direct breach
of Israel’s obligations under international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
We are alarmed by the situation in the West
Bank, including settlement policies, demolitions and
restrictions. The International Court of Justice has been
clear — the occupation is unlawful and it must end. We
condemn settler violence, including in the context of
the ongoing olive harvesting season.
We once again underline our call for an immediate
ceasefire. As suffering deepens, it is more essential
than ever to take immediate steps towards a ceasefire
and the release of hostages. We welcome efforts by
our partners to achieve a diplomatic solution. That
includes short-term arrangements that could contribute
to alleviating the suffering of people in Gaza. That
must be complemented by serious and irreversible steps
towards achieving a long-term solution, which can only
be in the form of the two-State solution.

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 19/28
Just as the Palestinian and Israeli people deserve
peace, so do people in Lebanon. We urge Israel to halt
its military operation. The escalation of conflict cannot
bring peace and security to peoples and States in the
region. We are appalled by the deepening humanitarian
crisis in Lebanon, including through the impact of
airstrikes and mass displacement. We condemn the
attacks on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and underline the need to ensure and respect
the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
We welcome the holding of the International Conference
in Support of Lebanon’s People and Sovereignty in
Paris. The swift and full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) is essential.
As the situation is becoming more extreme, our
opposition to violations of international law must
become stronger. Silence is assent. Therefore, we
cannot allow ourselves to accept any numbing effect of
the scale of violations. We also cannot allow ourselves
to be disillusioned by a lack of action in the Council.
The Council could do, and should do, more. The war
must end.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this quarterly
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
also thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
sobering briefing.
Malta remains gravely concerned about the war in
Gaza, the worsening situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, as well as the spreading of the conflict
into Lebanon and the wider regional implications of
these prolonged conflicts. While our commitment
to a secure, stable and peaceful Middle East remains
unshaken, the unabating attacks and violence, coupled
by the Council’s inability to act or implement its
resolutions, are deeply worrisome. An immediate and
unconditional ceasefire must be established.
The images and scenes coming out of Gaza
depict a horrific situation. Across the entire Strip,
unprecedented threats to civilians are rampant. The
humanitarian situation long ago became catastrophic.
Weeks of relentless Israeli shelling and hostilities in
the north, including on schools, hospitals, places of
worship and displacement camps, have caused mass
casualty incidents. Countless civilians, especially
women and children, continue to suffer forced and
repeated displacement. The cut-off of humanitarian
aid is further compounding the situation. The United
Nations and its implementing partners continue to face
severe and unlawful obstructions by Israeli authorities
in delivering critical aid to north Gaza. Most aid
convoys are denied access on a daily basis. The World
Food Programme has warned that the threat of famine
is growing. Immediate and sustained humanitarian
access across the Gaza Strip is desperately needed.
We unequivocally condemn all actions that target
civilians and civilian infrastructure. All parties must
adhere to international law, including through the
implementation of the orders of the International Court
of Justice on provisional measures. We reiterate our
condemnation of Hamas for its reprehensible terrorist
acts on 7 October 2023 and reiterate that Israel has the
right to defend itself in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law. We
similarly demand the immediate and unconditional
release of all hostages held by Hamas and other armed
groups and condemn the continued indiscriminate
rocket fire that is endangering civilian population
centres in Israel.
In the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the situation is deteriorating rapidly.
Israel’s unilateral actions, including illegal settlement
expansion, dispossession, arbitrary detainment and
continued raids in the West Bank, make life intolerable
for Palestinians. Extremist settler violence fosters
further instability. Furthermore, the status quo must be
maintained, and threats to the holy sites must cease. We
recall the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 19 July, which stated that Israel’s presence in
the occupied Palestinian territory is unlawful and must
end as soon as possible.
Malta is deeply concerned about the steps taken
by the Israeli Knesset yesterday to abrogate the ability
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
function in the occupied Palestinian territory. Those
actions are contrary to international law, further
entrench the occupation and have immediate devastating
implications for millions of Palestinians and broad
regional consequences. UNRWA is a stabilizing force
in the region and an irreplaceable actor for Palestine
refugees. We call on Israel to reconsider the legislation
and to ensure UNRWA’s unhindered access to those in
need. Equally crucial is international support for the
Palestinian Authority as it pursues revitalization.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
20/28 24-31894
Malta is also gravely concerned about the
escalating military situation in Lebanon. We condemn
the alarming toll on civilians and the widespread
displacement taking place. We call for an urgent
cessation of hostilities across the Blue Line and demand
a ceasefire rooted in resolution 1701 (2006). Hizbullah’s
rocket attacks must end, and Lebanon’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity must be upheld. Bolstering
Lebanon’s State institutions, particularly the Lebanese
Armed Forces, is also critical. As a troop-contributing
country, Malta is deeply concerned about recent
assaults on peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon. Such acts are blatant violations of
international law and undermine the mission’s critical
role. The Security Council must stand united in its
unwavering support for peacekeepers. Furthermore, we
also need to maintain focus on the recent attacks and
retaliatory strikes between Israel and Iran, which risks
further widening the conflict. We urge all parties to
de-escalate in order to break the cycle of escalation and
avoid an all-out regional war.
Our immediate priority at this pivotal moment
must be de-escalation and accountability. Diplomacy
and concerted efforts towards ceasefires in Gaza and
Lebanon are essential to prevent further bloodshed.
Beyond the immediate crisis, our long-term objective
must be the credible and irreversible realization of the
two-State solution in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
That is the only path that will ensure lasting peace and
security for Palestinians and Israelis and for the entire
region. The Council has not only the tools but also the
responsibility to act decisively, and Malta stands ready
to act. Let us not delay any further. The future of the
region depends on the actions we take today.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I welcome all the
ministers and their participation in this quarterly
open debate.
On 24 October, just five days ago, the United
Nations commemorated 79 years of its establishment,
with the primary purpose of upholding international
peace and security, avoiding another major war and
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
The situation in the Middle East, however, is deeply
troubling. The ongoing illegal occupation of the State
of Palestine by the State of Israel, compounded by
the escalation following the 7 October 2023 attacks,
has exacerbated the conflict. The acts of aggression
by Israel in Lebanon and the incessant Hizbullah
rocket attacks on Israel, the attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers, retaliatory strikes involving Iran and
Israel and assaults by, and retaliatory strikes against,
the Houthis in Yemen further complicate this already
volatile landscape. Those events challenge the very
raison d’être of the United Nations, our understanding
of the safeguards provided by international law and the
values we profess to uphold.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA),
a United Nations entity, is being targeted by, inter
alia, hostile legislation. We agree with the views of
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, that the law adopted by the Knesset of Israel
banning UNRWA in Israel “could have devastating
consequences for Palestinian refugees”.
As we approach this debate, over a year since the
recent escalation, it is essential to acknowledge the
grim realities as presented by our briefer. And so I take
this opportunity to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
sobering and comprehensive briefing.
Over 70 years since the question of Palestine was
first brought before the United Nations, we still bear the
burden of delivering peace in the region by supporting a
two-State solution that guarantees the independence of
the Palestinian people and a safe and secure Israel and
Palestine. After months of meetings and consultations,
the Security Council must fulfil its obligation as the
primary organ responsible for maintaining international
peace and security and ensure the implementation of its
resolutions 2712 (2023), 2720 (2023), 2728 (2024) and
2735 (2024). It must implement its resolutions in order
to end the horrifying cycle of death and destruction
for the people in Gaza and greater Palestine, as well
as to start the important task of rebuilding the State
of Palestine.
To achieve those very fundamental objectives, we
must be bold in our engagements with the parties to the
conflict and unrelenting in demanding that they uphold
the principles espoused in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
humanitarian law, as well as the binding orders of
the International Court of Justice, particularly the
provisional measures ordered in the Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v.
Israel).

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 21/28
For more than 12 months, we have repeated our
unequivocal condemnation of the killing of civilians
in Gaza, in the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Israel. We must emphasize the staggering toll: over
1,300 Israeli civilians have been killed and hostages
have been taken; and over 43,000 civilians in Gaza
have been killed, with over 100,000 more injured. That
cannot be normalized. Regrettably, we have witnessed
collective punishment, the intentional targeting of
civilians, the denial of humanitarian aid and the tragic
killing of humanitarian workers and journalists. The
use of civilians as human shields is a further violation
that cannot go unaddressed. Such actions violate the
core tenets of international humanitarian law.
We have denounced the multiple displacements of
civilians and the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
including attacks on hospitals and medical facilities,
the latest of which was the attack on Kamal Adwan
Hospital in north Gaza over the weekend. We also
condemn the recent Beit Lahiya attacks, with a rising
death toll of more than 93 Palestinians killed, compared
to the previously reported figure of 60.
Every day, statistics provided by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other
humanitarian organizations point to serious violations
of international humanitarian law and resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. While we note the complexity and deep-
rooted nature of the conflict, we are of the view that
achieving lasting peace and stability in the region
will require adherence by the parties to the conflict to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and other political and moral imperatives.
With an ever-worsening humanitarian crisis,
intensified military operations and tens of thousands
of civilian fatalities, Sierra Leone again calls for an
immediate ceasefire in the Gaza Strip and the entire
region and for the release of the remaining hostages
held by Hamas. A ceasefire is the most practical way to
move forward the process of engagement — especially
the resuscitated engagements by Egypt, Qatar and
the United States, supported by resolution 2735
(2024) — and to establish the conditions conducive
to the foundation of lasting peace. A ceasefire will
allow for the unhindered supply of essential medical
assistance and other humanitarian support, facilitate
negotiations and diplomatic efforts to address the
underlying issues and pave the way for post-conflict
reconstruction. Without a ceasefire, the cruel cycle of
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, repeated evacuation
orders, displacement and humanitarian restrictions
will continue.
An immediate ceasefire will rescue the 1.8 million
people across the Gaza Strip experiencing high levels of
acute food insecurity classified as being in Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) phase
3 — including the 133,000 people facing catastrophic
food insecurity and the estimated 60,000 cases of acute
malnutrition among children as young as 6 months
old — from starvation and death, as outlined in the
recent IPC Global Initiative’s special snapshot. It will
also protect the humanitarian personnel serving under
difficult circumstances, whose safety and well-being
are under continuous threat.
As was already emphasized by our briefer and
other Council members, swift and bold political will
and good-faith efforts are required by all parties to the
conflict in Gaza and other parts of the region to bring
an end to the fighting and ongoing destruction. That
is my delegation’s ultimate request in today’s quarterly
debate, and we stand ready to support all efforts
initiated by the Council to secure the freedom of the
Israeli hostages and to actualize the long-awaited desire
of the civilian population in Gaza and the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as in Israel, for genuine
peace, independence and peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Fu Cong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting.
I would also like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
Today the Council is once again considering the
situation in the Middle East. What is unfolding before
our eyes is that Gaza and the entire Middle East region
are confronted with an ever-worsening situation,
elusive peace prospects and a looming all-out war.
The Council should act immediately on those pressing
issues with a view to promoting a ceasefire, saving
lives and restoring peace.
I wish to stress the following points.
First, an immediate and permanent ceasefire
is the prerequisite for saving lives and preventing
further deterioration of the situation. There is no
justification for any delay in a ceasefire. The United
States has announced that it will reinvigorate ceasefire

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
22/28 24-31894
negotiations. We hope that those negotiations will not
fall into the same rut as we saw in the past few months,
or become a pretext for prolonging and expanding the
fighting. Related diplomatic efforts should not be used
as an excuse to obstruct Council action. We support the
Council in using all the means available in its toolbox
to take further action towards achieving a ceasefire.
Secondly, Gaza has been bombarded into a living
hell, with northern Gaza is becoming a hell within hell.
Humanitarian supplies have been cut off and relief
operations denied. Civilians in the Jabalia camp have
been evacuated at gunpoint, and patients and doctors
at the Kamal Adwan Hospital have been subjected to
inhumane treatment. The bottom line of international
humanitarian law has been trampled upon time and
again. It is a stain on the conscience of humankind
and cannot be tolerated. Israel must comply with its
obligations under the international humanitarian law.
No double standards should be permitted in that regard.
Thirdly, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has been providing relief in accordance with
the mandate bestowed upon it by the General Assembly
and is the backbone of humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
The Israeli Knesset, in total disregard for the strong
opposition of the international community, passed
two bills in an attempt to restrict and close UNRWA.
China expresses its strong condemnation in that regard.
Closing the Agency would be a new blow of collective
punishment against millions of Palestinian refugees
in the region and severely impact the humanitarian
situation, as well as security and stability in the
region. We call on Israel to halt and revoke those bills
and guarantee the dignity, safety and facilitation of
the work of United Nations humanitarian agencies,
including UNRWA.
Fourthly, in the current context, certain countries
are continuing their large-scale supply of weapons to
Israel. Whether such acts would contribute to achieving
the objectives set out in the relevant Council resolutions
is a serious issue that must be taken seriously. At
its tenth emergency special session, the General
Assembly adopted a resolution urging all States to stop
supplying weapons and equipment that might be used
in the occupied Palestinian territory (resolution ES-
10/24). China recently signed the joint letter initiated
by Türkiye along with more than 40 other countries
calling for the implementation of that requirement in
that resolution. We hope that the countries concerned
will take seriously the grave consequences of sending
such massive supplies of weapons and stop fuelling the
flames of military adventurism.
Fifthly, while the flames of war have been raging
on in Gaza over the past year, the situation in the West
Bank has also been deteriorating. Illegal settlements
have been expanding, with more than 1,700 Palestinian
houses confiscated by force or demolished and
thousands of Palestinians displaced. The occupying
Power has also frequently conducted violence against the
Palestinian people and used various means to suppress
and restrict the governance of the Palestinian National
Authority. Such practices are creating a new reality and
undermining the conditions on which the realization of
the two-State solution is based. Preventing unilateral
actions from eroding the basis of the two-State solution
should be a priority for the international community in
advancing Palestinian-Israeli peace in the next phase.
Sixthly, an all-out war in the region is looming.
Israel’s recent invasion into Lebanon, its continuous
indiscriminate bombardment and its multiple air strikes
against Iran and Syria have violated the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned
and further destabilized the region. The situation is
hanging by a thread. Any irresponsible adventurism
would be extremely dangerous and would most likely
lead to catastrophic consequences. We urge Israel to
abandon its obsession with force in order to prevent
the region from being plunged into a larger catastrophe.
We also call on all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint, comply with the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of international law and to return
to the right track of seeking political and diplomatic
solutions to disputes.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): We thank the
Swiss presidency of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We also extend
our appreciation to Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
insights on the current situation on the ground.
As just described by the Special Coordinator, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and in the occupied
Palestinian territories has reached catastrophic
proportions and continues to deteriorate. The relentless
escalation of violence, particularly targeting innocent
populations and civilian infrastructure, stands in
stark violation of international humanitarian law and

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 23/28
demands our immediate attention. This unprecedented
crisis necessitates unified and decisive action from the
Council to address both the immediate emergency in
Gaza and its broader regional implications.
In that connection, it is urgent and imperative for the
Council to expeditiously explores viable alternatives to
address this crisis, including by strengthening existing
resolutions through more robust and enforceable
measures to guarantee immediate and unhindered
humanitarian access to Gaza. Lives are at stake. The
resolution of this crisis fundamentally requires the
committed engagement and decisive intervention of key
members of the Council, in recognition of the fact that
stability in the Middle East is vital for both regional
and global security and development.
We must acknowledge that the four previously
adopted resolutions pertaining to Gaza have yet to
achieve full implementation. The Council maintains
the capacity to formulate more effective approaches to
secure an immediate and permanent ceasefire, address
the humanitarian crisis and facilitate the release of
all the hostages. That endeavour demands renewed
commitment and innovative strategies from the
international community and the Council.
Furthermore, we note with grave concern the recent
legislative action by the Israeli Knesset banning the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East from operating within Israel
and the occupied territories. That decision, which has
drawn widespread international criticism, severely
impedes the delivery of essential humanitarian
aid to Palestinian refugees. It is paramount that all
humanitarian actors, including United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, be afforded the
necessary access and security to fulfil their mandates
in accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights principles.
The Council must transcend the mere expression of
concerns to implement decisive action. The violations of
international law and total disregard for civilian rights
require a robust and united response from this organ.
Action is essential to safeguard human life and uphold
justice. The gravity of the situation demands immediate
attention. Any indication of potential genocide must
elicit a comprehensive response utilizing all available
diplomatic and legal mechanisms at our disposal. The
preservation of human life and dignity must remain our
foremost priority. Those concerted efforts are critical
not only for providing relief to affected populations but
also for maintaining the credibility and moral authority
of the international community in crisis response.
The Palestinian question persists as a fundamental
issue affecting diplomatic relations and strategic
interests in the Middle East. Its resolution is key to
lasting regional stability and peace. In that regard, we
reaffirm our consistent and unwavering commitment
to the vision of the two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine coexisting peacefully within recognized
borders, in full accordance with international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing
this morning. I also acknowledge the presence of the
various Ministers here in the Chamber with us today,
including Brazil’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, whose
country held the presidency of the Security Council
when the current spiral of violence in the region began.
These quarterly open debates are a valuable opportunity
for the members of the Council, who are constantly
speaking out on this issue, to listen to the views of other
Members of the United Nations. I will therefore try to
keep my remarks very brief.
More than a year has already passed since 7 October
2023, when Hamas perpetrated its terrorist attacks,
which Ecuador once again condemns unequivocally
today. We have witnessed more than a year of
unprecedented violence, which has caused death and
pain to both the people of Israel and the Palestinian
people, especially the residents of the Gaza Strip.
Ecuador reiterates the need for an immediate
ceasefire, the immediate release of all the hostages and
the immediate implementation of the four resolutions
already adopted by the Council on this matter. My
country also recalls that all parties must comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. A failure to do so will have
grave consequences.
Ecuador condemns all attacks against civilians,
critical infrastructure and civilian objects, as well as
all violence and hostilities against civilians. It is crucial
to stop the spiral of violence building throughout the
region, as well as to protect and support the work of
those who are working alleviate the suffering and help
the victims of war, in line with resolution 2730 (2024).

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
24/28 24-31894
Ecuador reiterates its support for the work of
the United Nations, its Secretary-General and all its
agencies. The States Members of the United Nations
must cooperate with it, as it is our Organization,
facilitate its work as much as possible and, at the very
least, not hinder its work. The role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East is particularly important for regional
stability. Any decision or action that affects its work
is worrisome.
My country has reiterated those positions on
many occasions, always with a view to contributing
in good faith to a solution to this conflict and acting
constructively in an attempt to build bridges and not
exacerbate differences between the parties.
Thousands of deaths and the suffering of entire
generations show that the question of Palestine will
not be resolved by weapons and violence. The ultimate
solution will be peaceful, negotiated and just for the
parties, with the existence of two States — Palestine
and Israel — on the basis of the 1967 borders and the
relevant resolutions. It is time to move forward on
that path.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): The post-war international
order is crumbling under our watch. The foundations
laid after two global conflicts are being eroded. The
events unfolding in the Middle East are not just another
chapter in an old conflict. They are a stark reflection
of a deeper crisis, where might makes right and the
principles meant to safeguard peace are overshadowed.
That is why President Lula da Silva has called for a
vigorous response to the grave challenges of our time.
As he underscored during the opening of the General
Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, the world
needs a comprehensive overhaul of the Charter of the
United Nations. A Charter review conference may
seem ambitious, but it reflects the founding vision of
the United Nations. Article 109 makes it clear that no
system should remain static in an ever-changing world.
The Council’s duty is to protect all humankind, not
just to cater to a few. Its failure to act decisively has
allowed atrocities to continue unchecked, with entire
populations paying the price. That is not mere rhetoric;
it is reflected in the crimes committed against civilians
in Gaza and Lebanon. More than 43,000 Palestinians
and 2,500 Lebanese lives have already been lost owing
to the cracks in a global order increasingly failing to
uphold its promises.
Brazil has been vocal in calling for an end to
the escalating violence in the Middle East. Since our
presidency of the Security Council in October last
year, when Israel was struck by a terrorist attack,
we have witnessed a relentless descent into violence.
Israel’s response to 7 October 2023 has gone far beyond
any sense of proportion. More bombs have fallen on
Gaza than on Dresden, Hamburg and London during
the Second World War. That is not self-defence; it is
collective punishment and obliteration.
We have all witnessed blatant and routine violations
of international humanitarian law in Gaza. Civilian areas
are indiscriminately and disproportionately targeted in
military operations, leading to the destruction of critical
infrastructure and the suffering of innocent people.
Famine and disease are spreading as the supply of
basic necessities is severed. Even those protected under
the Geneva Conventions — humanitarian workers,
doctors and health personnel — are being killed.
Journalists have been shot, and their news outlets have
been silenced.
The International Court of Justice issued provisional
measures directing Israel to halt actions that may violate
the Genocide Convention and to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid. In addition, resolution 2735 (2024)
demands a full ceasefire, the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from densely populated areas in Gaza and the
safe return of Palestinian civilians to their homes. Those
are not recommendations; they are binding obligations
under international law. When mandatory directives
from the highest legal and political bodies are ignored
with impunity, it signals a dangerous unravelling of
global governance. The consequence of that disregard
is more loss of life and unimaginable destruction.
When I previously addressed the Council a month
ago (see S/PV.9732), I warned that Lebanon stood on
the edge of a conflict. Today we mourn the loss of
thousands of innocent lives, including two Brazilian
teenagers. In just 30 days, the number of displaced
people in Lebanon has multiplied tenfold. Since I last
sat in this chair, I have been engaged in the urgent task
of repatriating thousands of our dual nationals from
Lebanon, completing nine rescue flights by Brazilian
Air Force planes amid increasing security risks,
including Israeli air strikes deep in Lebanese territory.
Thousands more await repatriation.

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 25/28
The expansion of the war from Gaza to Lebanon
shows a familiar pattern of disregard for the law.
Assaults against the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and now the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) are a brazen repudiation of the
multilateral system and everything the Charter of the
United Nations represents. This is not the first time
UNIFIL has come under fire. We must not forget the
1996 shelling by Israel of the UNIFIL compound in
Qana, where 106 civilians who had sought refuge there
were killed. That tragedy serves as a critical lesson of
what happens when the international community allows
such violations to go unpunished. When we fail to hold
perpetrators accountable, we pave the way for history
to repeat itself. That is why Brazil condemns in the
strongest terms the recent deliberate attacks against the
peacekeeping mission’s personnel and infrastructure
in Lebanon.
Brazil also condemns the decision taken in the
Knesset yesterday to pass laws against UNRWA. By
attempting to dismantle vital services for Palestinians,
those laws deepen the suffering of an already
devastated people and run counter to the request of
the International Court of Justice that Israel facilitate
access to humanitarian assistance to Gazans. Efforts
to undermine UNRWA are not just attacks on an
institution, but on the very survival and dignity of the
Palestinian people. Targeting UNRWA will neither
remove the refugee status of the Palestinian people
nor the responsibility of the international community
to protect those in need. We must reject that law for
what it is — a dangerous precedent that undermines
multilateralism and paves the way for further erosion
of the global order.
When international law is violated, those
responsible must face consequences. It is our duty,
as States Members of the United Nations, to ensure
that justice be enforced, investigations be carried out,
responsibility be attributed and penalties be imposed
to prevent impunity and uphold the rule of law. We
must uphold justice, not just call for it. In the face of
a plausible case of genocide and the indiscriminate
targeting of civilians, the international community
can no longer be complicit by providing weapons that
enable such crimes. The same holds true for weapons
that prolong the illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territories. We cannot allow the veto to become a shield
for impunity.
Every time the Council meets to discuss the Middle
East, the situation grows direr. New front lines emerge,
more innocent lives are lost and the crisis deepens.
The recent attacks on Iran serve only to underscore the
escalating risk of a regional catastrophe. We are sliding
towards a world where future generations will inherit
nothing but a legacy of endless conflict and suffering.
How many more innocent lives will we count the next
time that we convene? How much more suffering will
we allow? War will not bring peace to the Middle East.
Peace will come through a decisive commitment to
diplomacy, rooted in justice and respect for international
law. As we grapple with the escalating violence and the
expansion of conflict, President Lula da Silva’s call for
a review of the United Nations Charter resonates more
urgently than ever. We owe it to future generations to
ensure that this organ has the strength and mandate to
uphold justice, protect humankind and secure lasting
peace. It is time to take the bold steps needed to make
peace not just an aspiration, but a reality for all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statements to be delivered by the
representatives of Uganda, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries; Mauritania, on behalf of
the Group of Arab States; Cameroon, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation; and Senegal,
as Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
It is inconceivable that, more than a year after
it began, the Security Council has not stopped the
genocide being committed against the Palestinian
people. More than 43,000 Palestinians, 70 per cent of
them women and children, have been massacred. More
than 2,500 people in Lebanon have been killed. Those
numbers are growing at an exponential rate. Far from
establishing an immediate and permanent ceasefire,
Israel has continued to attack hospitals, schools and
refugee camps in the occupied Palestinian territories,
in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. Far from establishing a ceasefire, the conflict is
spreading in the Middle East region, with the aggression
spilling over into Lebanon, with indiscriminate
bombings in Syria and Yemen and a new and dangerous
escalation directed against the Islamic Republic of
Iran. The Israeli Government has lashed out against
and denigrated the United Nations and the Secretary-
General, has undermined the security of the United

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
26/28 24-31894
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and has continued
the deadliest attacks ever on United Nations personnel
and humanitarian workers in Gaza. The occupying
Power continues to hinder the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people.
In addition to violating the Charter of the United
Nations and Israel’s obligations under international
law, the recent adoption by the Knesset of a law
prohibiting the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East from
carrying out all activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories will deepen the suffering of the Palestinian
people. How many more women and children have to
be slaughtered before the international community
acts, ends the aggression and the illegal occupation
and provides urgently needed international protection
for the Palestinian people? How much more destruction
must be meted out before — instead of speeches and
rhetorical flourishes of support — practical steps are
taken against the genocide under way? The impunity
with which the Israeli Government continues to act is
not only evidence of the ineffectiveness of the Security
Council, but it undermines multilateralism and the very
essence of the Charter and international law. It also
means that the Palestinian people are truly facing an
existential threat. It means that more innocent victims
will continue to be killed, maimed, detained and
displaced. Such impunity is made possible only through
the complicit political, military, logistical and financial
support provided to the occupying Power by the
Government of the United States, which acts according
to double standards and prevents the Security Council
from taking action.
Achieving peace in the Middle East will be
impossible without a just solution to the Palestinian
question, which the Israeli Government is trying to
prevent through every means possible in destroying the
State of Palestine and obviating the establishment of
two States. Establishing a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State will be impossible without the
inclusion of Gaza and the pre-1967 borders, as it will
be impossible without East Jerusalem as its capital
and the return of refugees. The International Court of
Justice, at the request of the General Assembly, has
handed down a clear decision: Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian territory and the denial of its people’s right
to self-determination are unlawful and in violation of
international law. The immediate and unconditional
admission of Palestine as a State Member of the United
Nations is a crucial step towards a definitive solution
to the conflict. Why must Palestine continue to wait
to become a full Member of the United Nations, when
Israel did so 75 years ago pursuant to a resolution
(General Assembly resolution 181 (II)) that provided
for the creation of two States? In order to achieve peace
and stability in the region, the total and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian Golan and all
occupied Arab territories is also imperative.
We demand a halt to acts of aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the brotherly
nations of the Middle East. External interference
in the region must cease. We reiterate the call for an
immediate and unconditional end to the arbitrary
and illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed by
the United States against sovereign countries in the
Middle East. Cuba will continue to contribute to all
legitimate international efforts that contribute to a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. The concerted action of all Governments
and peoples of the world is urgently needed to stop
the aggression of the Israeli Government. Every
minute that we stand idle will cost new innocent lives,
greater suffering and destruction. Cuba will never be
indifferent to injustice. The Palestinian cause and the
brotherly nations of the region will always be able to
count on our firm solidarity and support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Hachem (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank Switzerland for organizing this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, and we welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Ignazio Cassis,
Head of the Federal Department for Foreign Affairs
of Switzerland. We also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his briefing.
/Over a year has passed since the events of
7 October 2023. The fighting continues. The cycle of
killing, destruction and displacement has expanded.
The Council has been unable to impose a ceasefire in
Gaza. The aggression has expanded to include Lebanon.
They are bombing Lebanon using the worst, most lethal
and most destructive types of weapons. Our women,
children and paramedics are being targeted with
bunker-busting bombs, vacuum bombs and explosive
drones. The number of those killed is in the thousands.
The international community remains silent, perhaps
desensitized by the thousands who have been killed in

29/10/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9763
24-31894 27/28
Gaza. It is no longer moved by the bloodshed or images
of body parts. The credibility of the United Nations
and of the Council is on the line. All of the Council’s
resolutions on the Middle East are still not implemented.
The humanitarian situation is difficult. Indeed, it
is catastrophic. Over the past few weeks, more than
1.4 million Lebanese people have become internally
displaced after fleeing the bombing, killing and
destruction. The Israeli killing machine spares no one.
Overnight, families lose their normal lives, homes,
memories and hopes. They have fled to shelters seeking
security and safety. Israel was able to rob them of their
homes, memories and hopes, but it cannot take away
their will to live and resist. The killing machine, which
has killed children, women and the elderly, recently
began to target journalists, paramedics and medical
personnel. They are targeting hospitals. They are
targeting cultural and historic sites, such as Baalbek
and Tyre. With blind hatred, they are bombing history
and international civilization and heritage. Those
acts can be described only as war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
In a desperate attempt by Israel to “kill the
solution”, it has deliberately targeted locations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and the Lebanese army. Israel is trying to destroy
resolution 1701 (2006) to invade territory and prompt
the evacuation of UNIFIL and Lebanese army positions,
so as to facilitate that invasion.
We would like to thank France and the French
President for organizing the Paris International
Conference in Support of Lebanon’s People and
Sovereignty on 24 October. We also thank all
the countries that participated and the States and
international organizations that made pledges. The
needs are immense. The challenges are many. And the
reality is bitter. Lebanon has endured a great burden
when it comes to displacement; and it cannot confront
internal displacement on its own. We are relying on
everyone’s assistance and, from the bottom of our
hearts, we thank all the countries that are helping us to
face this humanitarian tragedy.
All of these atrocities could have been avoided.
All these massacres could have been stopped. These
sacrifices are enough to compel everyone to go back to
reason and reality. The solution is clear and direct. It was
produced by the Council. The solution lies in resolution
1701 (2006) — to put an end to the acts of aggression,
to guarantee the deployment of the Lebanese army, to
withdraw weapons and to achieve stability. It is not a
magic formula. There is no supernatural solution. We
will not be reinventing the wheel. This solution would
spare us bloodshed, destruction and senseless acts. And
Israel’s acts can be described only as senseless.
The Government and the people of Lebanon do not
want war. We want the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) in its entirety. The international community
wants the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
The Security Council wants the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The mediators are present
around the table. They have been providing solutions
for the past 13 months. However, on the other side there
is a party that does not want a solution, but rather to
sacrifice additional lives and to continue the war for a
single reason, that is, ambition and personal agendas. If
they wanted to give precedence to the interests of their
people, they would have ended the war immediately,
avoided the bloodshed and implemented the resolution.
Lebanon emphasizes the need to implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. The Lebanese
Foreign Minister provided steps for the implementation
process: first, Israel’s withdrawal from all Lebanese
territory occupied during its latest aggression and
a return to its side of the border, in line with the
1949 Armistice Agreement; secondly, extending the
deployment of the Lebanese army south of the Litani
River and along the southern border so that there are
no weapons there other than those approved by the
Government of Lebanon or any authority other than that
of the Government of Lebanon, in line with resolution
1701 (2006); thirdly, ensuring the return of IDPs to their
villages and homes; fourthly, resuming the currently
paused indirect negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations and with the participation of one or more
international mediators to resolve pending points, in
line with resolution 1701 (2006); and fifthly, beginning
a serious negotiation process, with a specified timeline,
for the return of the Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shouba
Hills and point B1 in Ras Naqoura, so as to rebuild what
was destroyed, restore agricultural land contaminated
with white phosphorus and remove any remnants of
the aggression against Lebanon. That will enable us to
provide a decent life to the citizens of south Lebanon, as
well allow us at last to provide financial and technical
assistance to enhance the capacity of the Lebanese
State, including both civilian and military institutions.

S/PV.9763 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 29/10/2024
28/28 24-31894
Over the past 80 years, the United Nations and its
agencies have put in place principles and conventions
to regulate and order international relations. However,
over the past 13 months, Israel has destroyed all those
frameworks, conventions and laws. It has behaved like
a child who has been spoiled so much that it destroys
everything. After everything that has happened, how
can they call for the implementation of those laws and
conventions? There are very clearly double standards
at play here.
Even wars have rules and restrictions, as set out by
international law and international humanitarian law.
Unfortunately, Israel continues to ignore the principles
of international humanitarian law and the laws of war.
We will provide you with a copy of the Charter of the
United Nations, Mr. President, so that you can share
it with Israel. We hope that you will remind Israel
of the provisions of international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions. Maybe then they
will respect them.
In conclusion, it is our legitimate right to respond to
what was said at the previous meeting (see S/PV.9762).
We therefore say to everyone that our natural place is
behind the name plate of the Lebanese Republic. We
will defend our country and the rights of our people.
And we will defend the Lebanese flag and our cedars.
The President (spoke in French): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
