Remarks by H.E. Wang Yi
At the Session “The Role of BRICS in Addressing Global and Regional Crises and Advancing Pathways to Peace and Security”
Of the Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs / International Relations of BRICS Member Countries
Rio de Janeiro, April 28, 2025
Colleagues,
It is a great pleasure to attend the Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs / International Relations of BRICS Member Countries. I wish to welcome Indonesia to the BRICS family. And I thank the Brazilian presidency for organizing this meeting.
This years marks the 80th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations (U.N.). The founding of the U.N. opened up a new chapter of countries working together for peace and common development, and advanced the progress of human civilization. Today, eight decades later, the international landscape is undergoing profound changes, the world is entering a period of turbulence and transformation, and the cause of peace and development faces new and grave challenges.
We are witnessing the erosion of the basic principles of international cooperation. Multilateralism is the cornerstone of the post-WWII international order, and cooperation in solidarity is the broadest consensus of the international community. However, some country has developed a seriously misguided perception of the world. The new U.S. administration has vigorously pursued unilateralism and the “America First” agenda, placing its self-interest above the common good of the international community while turning its back on the spirit of equality, collaboration and mutual benefit.
We are witnessing the breach of widely recognized international rules. Global stability and prosperity is underpinned by the current international system; yet its greatest beneficiary, the United States, is now working against the system. The law of the jungle, where might makes right, has brazenly taken a place on stage. Coercion and bullying are no longer concealed. The very foundation of international relations is facing constant challenges.
We are witnessing disruptions to international peace and development. Some regional conflicts have become protracted and even spiraled into vicious cycles, while new flashpoints continue to erupt. Civilian casualties and humanitarian crises are deeply disturbing, the prospect of peace hangs in the balance, and the specter of war looms larger than ever.
Colleagues,
At every critical juncture in history where risks are high and challenges grave, the future of humanity hinges on whether countries can make the right choice. Since its inception, BRICS has always been a positive and constructive force for good on the international stage. Under the new circumstances, BRICS countries must take the lead in acting as pillars of peace and development.
First, we should uphold universal security. Just as a drop of water won’t go dry in the vast ocean, the security of one nation can endure only in an environment of security for all. In today’s world of interdependence between countries, there is no such thing as “absolute security” or “exclusive security.” President Xi Jinping solemnly proposed the Global Security Initiative (GSI), which advocates a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and calls for respecting countries’ sovereignty and territorial integrity, abiding by the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter, and taking seriously the legitimate security concerns of all countries. The GSI provides important guidance for reducing the peace deficit and pooling collective efforts to promote security.
China stands ready to work with BRICS countries to actively implement the GSI, and encourage all countries to explore security governance on the condition of mutual respect, promote lasting peace on the basis of fairness and justice, and embark on a new path to security that features dialogue over confrontation, partnership over alliance, and win-win cooperation over zero-sum games.
Second, we should actively promote peace talks. Dialogue and negotiation is the most practical and viable way out of crises. Exerting pressure or creating confrontation at every turn will only invite greater problems. BRICS countries should uphold their impartial and fair positions, stay committed to resolving differences through dialogue and negotiation, support U.N. agencies in performing their duties, and create conditions for achieving political settlement.
Currently, the situation in the Ukraine crisis has shown new developments. This crisis has its complex history and practical causes, but efforts for peace should not stop under any circumstances. China has been calling for political settlement through dialogue and negotiation since the outbreak of the crisis, and actively pushed for peace talks based on the four points proposed by President Xi Jinping on what must be done. China supports all efforts for peace, and hopes the parties concerned can address the root causes of the crisis and reach a fair and durable peace deal that is binding and accepted by all parties concerned at an early date.
The situation in the Middle East is at a critical stage, and the question of Palestine must not be marginalized again. The immediate priority is to bring about a comprehensive ceasefire in Gaza and alleviate the humanitarian catastrophe. The long-term resolution lies in advancing the two-State solution and realizing peaceful coexistence between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel. China welcomes the return to dialogue with regard to the Iranian nuclear issue and opposes resolving Middle East issues through force or power politics. China has facilitated the reconciliation between Saudi Arabia and Iran, and played a facilitating role in restoring unity among Palestinian factions. We stand ready to work with fellow BRICS members to make continuous efforts toward enduring peace and stability in the Middle East.
Third, we should solidify the foundation of development. BRICS countries should continue to hold high the banner of openness and cooperation, firmly safeguard the multilateral trading system, oppose trade wars, reject high tariffs, promote mutually beneficial and integrated development among nations, and support a universally beneficial and inclusive economic globalization.
The Global Development Initiative (GDI) proposed by President Xi Jinping has won the support of more than 100 countries and international organizations. At last year’s G20 Summit in Rio de Janeiro, President Xi further announced eight actions China would take to promote global development, including giving least developed countries zero-tariff treatment for 100 percent tariff lines. We are ready to work with BRICS countries in solidarity to strengthen practical cooperation in areas such as poverty reduction, agriculture, education and health, and provide more public goods for the Global South.
Fourth, we should step up practical cooperation. BRICS countries have always been champions of progressive ideas, and go-getters that turn visions into actions. Facing nontraditional security challenges such as terrorism, public health issues and food crises, we should do the following: We should fully leverage the BRICS Counterterrorism Working Group to strengthen information exchange and experience sharing and promote law enforcement cooperation and capacity building. We should ensure the functioning of the BRICS Vaccine R&D Center to improve vaccine accessibility and affordability in developing countries. We should earnestly implement the BRICS Strategy on Food Security Cooperation to keep industrial and supply chains stable and unimpeded for agricultural products. We should expand cooperation in new frontiers such as the deep sea, polar regions and outer space, and jointly tackle global challenges.
Colleagues,
China has always been a builder of world peace, a contributor to global development, and a defender of the international order. In the face of a turbulent global landscape, China will continue to demonstrate certainty, responsibility, and opportunity to the world through concrete actions. We stand ready to work hand in hand with our BRICS partners to create and embrace a brighter future for humanity.
Thank you.
