On September 19, 2025, Member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and Foreign Minister Wang Yi expounded China's views on the current Palestinian-Israeli conflict during his talks with Moroccan Foreign Minister Nasser Bourita in Beijing.
Wang Yi said, having dragged on for two years, the conflict has caused an unprecedented humanitarian disaster and breached the bottom line of human conscience. China is deeply concerned and expresses deep regret. Israel insists on advancing its plan to take over Gaza City, launches airstrikes targeted at Hamas members who are planning peace talks in Qatar, and at the same time accelerates its encroachment on the territory of the West Bank. These actions seriously violate the norms of international law. They are not only of no benefit to building their own security, but also put the two-State solution at risk and directly undermine the stability of the Middle East region.
Force cannot bring peace, and violence cannot lead to security. Historical experience has repeatedly proven that security should be shared, and no country can build its own security on the insecurity of other countries. Israel has the right to establish a state, and so does Palestine. There should be no double standards on this. It has been nearly 80 years since the founding of Israel, yet the Palestinian people still have no place to settle. This situation is unsustainable. The lives of the Israeli people and the Arab people are equally precious, and neither should be deemed as superior to the other. Both deserve respect and need care. Violence in response to violence will only create and accumulate new hatred.
Wang Yi stressed that in the face of the current emergency situation, the international community should unite. First, it is imperative to promote a comprehensive ceasefire in Gaza with the greatest sense of urgency to alleviate the current humanitarian disaster. Countries that have a special influence on Israel should take on their responsibilities earnestly, and the United Nations Security Council and humanitarian agencies should also fulfill their duties. Second, it is imperative to truly implement the principle of "Palestinians governing Palestine". Gaza and the West Bank are both inalienable territories of Palestine. Any post-war governance and reconstruction arrangements should respect the will of the Palestinian people and safeguard the legitimate rights of the Palestinian nation. Third, it is imperative to firmly uphold the two-State solution, pool greater international consensus and form a more unified stance. On the basis of recognizing the State of Palestine, Wang Yi called for supporting Palestine's full membership in the United Nations, and seeking feasible paths to advance the two-State solution, while rejecting any unilateral actions that erode the foundation of the two-State solution.
Wang Yi said, China has always firmly supported the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national rights. China will remain committed to a ceasefire and end of war in Gaza, and promote an early, comprehensive, just and lasting resolution of the Palestinian question based on relevant United Nations resolutions and the two-State solution.
