ASTANA – Kazakhstan and Israel signed a series of cooperation documents and agreed to expand bilateral engagement as Kazakh Foreign Minister Yermek Kosherbayev held talks with Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Sa’ar, who paid an official visit to Astana on Jan. 27.
From L to R: Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Sa’ar and Kazakh Foreign Minister Yermek Kosherbayev. Photo credit: Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Following the 12th round of political consultations between the two countries’ foreign ministries, the sides signed memoranda of cooperation on diplomatic training and public diplomacy, as well as a memorandum of intent to negotiate a visa-exemption agreement for holders of national passports, aimed at boosting tourism exchanges.
During the meeting, the ministers also discussed prospects for strengthening trade, economic and investment ties, as well as cooperation in tourism, science, education, and healthcare. They also focused on technology transfer and expanding practical cooperation between government agencies and business communities in both countries.
As part of the visit, the 12th round of political consultations between the foreign ministries took place. The discussions covered international and regional issues, including initiatives to promote peaceful settlement and build confidence in the Middle East. In this context, the sides exchanged views on Kazakhstan’s participation in the Gaza Board of Peace and cooperation under the Abraham Accords framework.
“Since the establishment of diplomatic relations in April 1992, we have built comprehensive cooperation based on mutual respect and trust and achieved significant progress in political, economic, and cultural interaction,” Kosherbayev said.
Photo credit: The Astana Times
He highlighted the intensifying dialogue, noting the important role played by the leaders of both states in advancing bilateral cooperation. Kazakh foreign minister also underscored the solid legal framework underpinning relations and said there is strong potential for expanding trade, investment, and technological cooperation.
“Kazakhstan is interested in implementing joint projects with high added value in areas such as agrotechnologies and the food industry, healthcare and medical technologies, infrastructure and logistics, energy efficiency, and renewable energy sources,” Kosherbayev said.
He also noted that Kazakhstan ranks among global leaders in digital technologies according to the United Nations Online Services Index and the World Bank GovTech Maturity Index, inviting Israeli companies to engage in cooperation.
Sa’ar confirmed Israel’s readiness to deepen cooperation across all areas of mutual interest, emphasizing the importance of strengthening economic ties and cultural and humanitarian exchanges.
This visit marks the first official visit by an Israeli Foreign Minister to Kazakhstan in 16 years and the first-ever visit by Gideon Sa’ar to Astana.
Get The Astana Times stories sent directly to you! Sign up via the website or subscribe to our X, Facebook, Instagram, Telegram, YouTube and Tiktok!
