Thank you, Your Excellency my dear brother Dr. Badr Abdelatty, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Migration and Egyptians Abroad of the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude and appreciation to you, my dear brother, for the warm reception and generous hospitality, which is by no means unfamiliar from our brothers in the Arab Republic of Egypt.
I was pleasured to meet with my brother, His Excellency Prime Minister Dr. Mostafa Madbouly, a short while ago, together with several Egyptian ministers and Qatari colleagues.
Our visit today comes within the framework of the sixth session of the Joint Higher Committee, and also as a reflection of the vision of the leadership of both countries, and the vision of His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, to deepen the relationship between the State of Qatar and the Arab Republic of Egypt, which has also witnessed notable progress in recent years. Notably, the visit of His Excellency President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi to his second country, Qatar, represented an important milestone in the development of these relations.
As Your Excellency has noted—and without repeating—the foundation of this fraternal relationship lies first and foremost in the strong and enduring bonds, between our two peoples and our two leaderships. At the same time, the new economic foundations and structures currently being built between our countries are paving the way for a new phase of economic cooperation, in addition to, and as Your Excellency mentioned, the investment package announced in Doha, valued at USD 7.5 billion.
In the coming weeks, we look forward, God willing, to finalizing several agreements on agreed upon joint projects. We have also witnessed growth in trade exchange between the two countries, and we aspire, God willing, to see further expansion in this field.
Furthermore, Cooperation is not limited to the economic sphere, but extends across multiple fields, including culture, agriculture, social solidarity, and social insurance. Today, we signed a Memorandum of Understanding that represents an important step toward diversifying the foundation of cooperation between the two countries.
As Your Excellency mentioned, today we had a valuable opportunity for consultation, which has always been continuous, sincerely speaking—not only through formal meetings but also through daily communications.
At this platform, I would like to commend the sincere efforts undertaken by our colleagues, both in the Arab Republic of Egypt through the relevant authorities, and in the State of Qatar, reflecting the commitment of both countries to achieve a ceasefire and to halt the ongoing genocide against our brothers and sisters in Gaza. Regrettably, we are witnessing a distressing continuation of this situation over the past months, without any meaningful action from the international community. We highly appreciate the support of our Arab and Islamic sisterly countries in backing the Qatari and Egyptian efforts, as well as our partnership with the United States.
However, we have now reached a stage where we await a response from the Israeli side, following intensive efforts in recent days to reach common ground, culminating in an agreement for the release of detainees and hostages, a prisoner exchange, and a ceasefire to pave the way for ending the war. Unfortunately, these efforts have so far been met with further disregard.
We believe that today the international community faces a significant responsibility to uphold its duty and put an end to this famine and blockade affecting our brothers in Gaza.
I would like to reaffirm, at this platform, that the State of Qatar and the Arab Republic of Egypt remain committed to achieving a resolution and ending this war, despite all attempts to distort and undermine these efforts. Were it not for this partnership and these joint endeavours, we would not have reached the preliminary agreement. God willing, we hope to achieve a full agreement as soon as possible. We call on the international community to exert pressure on Israel to at least halt this famine.
Your Excellency, you mentioned that the bilateral meeting addressed various issues. We remain keen on continuous joint coordination, and we have observed, both from Your Excellency and from the Arab Republic of Egypt, a clear convergence of views on regional issues, as well as a shared commitment to finding solutions and halting the ongoing cycle of escalation in different countries.
Regrettably, today we are witnessing irresponsible Israeli actions in our sister countries Lebanon and Syria, and also in Sudan, particularly in Lebanon and Syria, which undermine regional security and, unfortunately, have not been met with any deterrent measures.
We also discussed the situation and developments regarding the Iranian nuclear file, which constitutes a critical security issue for all countries in the region. We emphasized the importance of reaching a diplomatic solution to achieve regional stability, which cannot be attained through wars but rather through diplomatic measures. It is imperative for all Arab countries and regional states to cooperate, in order to achieve these diplomatic solutions.
I thank Your Excellency, Minister, for your generous hospitality and for your continued cooperation with us. We also extend our gratitude to all the countries supporting these efforts, and we hope, God willing, that through collective action we can achieve stability in the region.
Thank you very much.
