Remarks by H.E. Wang Yi
At the G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
New York, September 25, 2024
Your Excellency Foreign Minister Mauro Vieira,
Colleagues,
It is a pleasure to attend the G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting. I would like to thank the President, Brazil, for its hard work.
The theme of this year’s G20 summit is “building a just world and a sustainable planet.” This echoes the call of the times and meets the aspiration of the people. G20 members should shoulder responsibilities and set examples in a manner befitting major countries. We should advance and improve global governance in the spirit of partnership and make unremitting efforts for a just world and a sustainable planet.
President Xi Jinping often says that actions speak louder than words and that success is one part planning and nine parts implementation. Today, the meeting launched the Call to Action on Global Governance Reform. Going forward, we should translate the Call into action and vision into outcome.
The G20 should be supporters of U.N. reform. We should uphold true multilateralism, not selective multilateralism. The U.N., as the core platform for global governance, should better fulfill its mission of maintaining world peace and promoting common development. The reform of the Security Council should go through in-depth discussions in the spirit of consensus-building, and focus on boosting the representation of developing countries. The development of artificial intelligence (AI) concerns the common interests of the international community, and the U.N. should play a central role in the governance of this frontier technology. China supports establishing an AI governance mechanism within the U.N. framework and delivering on the U.N. General Assembly Resolution on Enhancing International Cooperation in Capacity-Building of Artificial Intelligence.
The G20 should be promoters of global economic and financial governance reform. We should further enhance macro policy coordination and reduce the negative spillover effect of policy adjustments made by advanced economies. We should implement the Global Digital Compact, and bridge the North-South digital divide. We should advance the reform of the global financial architecture. The World Bank should carry out shareholding review in 2025 as scheduled, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) should develop a new quota formula by June 2025, so as to give developing countries greater representation and say. China supports the efforts of Secretary General António Guterres to promote reform of the global financial system.
The G20 should be boosters of global trade governance reform. We should stick to the original goal of building an open world economy, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and foster a just, fair and non-discriminatory environment for trade and investment. We should oppose protectionism of all forms, build more bridges of cooperation, and reduce “small yard, high fence” type of trade barriers. We should bring the dispute settlement mechanism of the World Trade Organization (WTO) back to normal operation, and include the Investment Facilitation for Development Agreement in the framework of WTO rules. We should maintain stable and smooth industrial and supply chains, reject discriminatory and exclusive rules, and avoid taking market-distorting measures inconsistent with WTO rules.
The G20 should be practitioners of global development reform. We should accelerate implementation of the U.N. 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and work for more inclusive and resilient development beneficial to all. We should deepen global development partnerships, mobilize global development resources, and facilitate greater synergy in actions that are supportive of global development. Since President Xi Jinping put forward the Global Development Initiative (GDI) three years ago, more than 100 countries and international organizations have supported the GDI, over 80 countries have joined the Group of Friends of the GDI, and China has carried out over 1,100 cooperation programs with various sides. China supports Brazil’s proposal to establish a Global Alliance Against Hunger and Poverty. China welcomes the consensus on reducing inequalities and strengthening drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene services, and will work with G20 partners to enhance cooperation in this regard.
Colleagues,
Friends,
Peace and security are the common aspiration of people around the world, and turning swords into ploughshares is the common goal of all U.N. member states. China advocates following the principles of no expansion of the battlefield, no escalation of fighting and no provocation by any party, to work for deescalation of the Ukraine crisis as soon as possible and create conditions for starting peace talks in due course. The Gaza situation is a test for justice and human conscience. The pressing priority is to achieve immediate, comprehensive and sustainable ceasefire, ease the humanitarian crisis, implement the two-State solution, and accept Palestine as a full U.N. member state.
China is ready to work with the G20 to carry forward the spirit of partnership, adhere to the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter, advocate an equal and orderly multipolar world and a mutually beneficial and inclusive economic globalization, and together with people of all countries, share the fruits of development and create a better future.
Thank you.
