berhasil mengambil data konten publikasi
Indonesian Minister For Foreign Affairs Statement on The Ongoing Israeli Military Aggression Against The Palestinian People
Pidato tersedia dalam bahasa Inggris
Pidato tersedia dalam bahasa Inggris​
Indonesian Minister For Foreign Affairs Statement on The Ongoing Israeli Military Aggression Against The Palestinian People
Bismillahirrahmanirrahiim...
Colleagues,
I am supposed to be with my President in Beijing now for the Belt and Road
Forum. My President asked me to leave him in Beijing and fly to Jeddah to
attend this meeting.
Statement H.E. Retno L.P. Marsudi Minister for Foreign Affairs Republic of Indonesia at The Open-Ended Extraordinary Emergency Meeting of The OIC Executive Committee at The Level of Foreign Ministers to Discuss The Ongoing Israeli Military Aggression Against The Palestinian People Jeddah, 18 October 2023
Bismillahirrahmanirrahiim...
Colleagues,
I am supposed to be with my President in Beijing now for the Belt and Road Forum. My President asked me to leave him in Beijing and fly to Jeddah to attend this meeting.
Indonesia cannot stand still to see the devastating humanitarian situation in Gaza. Indonesia strongly condemns the unprecedented aggression against civilian in the besieged Gaza strip and the entire occupied Palestinian territory.
Indonesia also strongly condemned attack by Israel to Al Ahly Hospital that caused hundreds of civilian casualties.
Israel’s evacuation orders for 22 hospitals in Gaza are inhumane, contrary to the international humanitarian law, and must be ignored.
Efforts to evacuate our nationals failed and failed again due to the situation.
Colleagues,
Our meeting should not only send strong messages, but also mobilize international support to end the horrifying situation in Gaza.
Three things that should come out from this meeting.
First, ending the cycle of violence now.
The OIC must utilize every possible avenue to urge for an immediate ceasefire.
Since the UNSC is not able to perform, therefore the OIC should urge UNGA to convene an emergency special session to gather a stronger international support.
Second, ensuring safe and unimpeded passage of humanitarian access.
Blocking access to power, water, and fuel, and collective punishment against civilians are forbidden in international law.
Every second counts before the Palestinians are crushed, deprived of their basic rights to live.
The OIC must urgently call on all relevant parties to create humanitarian corridors in Gaza, and ensure international humanitarian law is respected. We must also reject categorically calls to displace the population of Gaza strip.
Third, addressing the root cause of the conflict.
Colleagues,
Lasting peace will never be achieved without setting things right for the Palestinian people.
The OIC must urge for meaningful peace process to continue to achieve the two-state solution, as the only way forward.
I would like to remind us again.
That the Palestinian cause is the main reason for the OIC’s existence.
If there is a time for the OIC to prove its cause, there is no other time than now.
We must act together now.
Do not let this situation is used by Israel and other countries to wipe out the issue of Palestine, to wipe out the right of the people of Palestine to exist, and do not let Israel to complete occupation against the land of Palestinians
I thank you very much.
19 Oktober 2023
Pidato Menteri
Foreign Minister's Speeches
Ini Diplomasi
Indonesian Way
Indonesia Untuk Dunia
Indonesia For The World
Rintis Kemajuan
Economic Diplomacy
Style F
Pidato Menteri
Foreign Minister's Speeches
Pidato Menteri
Foreign Minister's Speeches
Style G
