We, Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of the State of Israel, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic, and Nikos Christodoulides, President of the Republic of Cyprus, convened today in Jerusalem for the 10th Trilateral Summit among our countries.
Our Trilateral Cooperation
We recognize that our region stands at a historic juncture, with the opportunity to usher in an era of stability, prosperity, and cooperation stretching from India, through the Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean, to Europe. This joint vision for progress, security, stability and peace is founded on respect for the historic heritage of the peoples it connects, their common interests, and shared values.
Today’s trilateral summit reaffirms our unwavering commitment to strengthen our cooperation, enhancing the security and resilience of our nations for generations to come.
We agree to convene an annual Leaders’ Summit and to intensify ministerial and working-level trilateral meetings, thereby deepening cooperation and expanding joint initiatives.
We also reaffirm the importance of the 3+1 format with the United States and invite other like-minded partners to join our framework in a 3+1 format.
Security, Counterterrorism, and Maritime Cooperation
To ensure the realization of this vision, we reaffirm the need for concerted action to overcome existing and emerging challenges.
In this regard, we agree to reinforce our ongoing trilateral cooperation on security, defense and military matters.
We reaffirm our commitment to combatting terrorism, including efforts to eradicate the financing of terrorist activities.
We underscore the importance of maritime security and pledge to deepen collaboration in safeguarding sea lanes and critical infrastructure against emerging threats. We welcome the establishment of the Maritime Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (MCCE) in Cyprus, and its planned inauguration in 2026.
We acknowledge the significant and consistent contributions by Cyprus and Greece to humanitarian efforts in Gaza, including through the Amalthea maritime corridor which is implemented in coordination between Cyprus and Israel and in close cooperation with international partners, in line with the 2720 Mechanism, for the delivery of additional aid.
We reiterate the importance of President Trump’s 20-point Gaza Peace Plan, which was endorsed by UN Security Council Resolution 2803, and call for the immediate return of the last remaining Israeli hostage, Ran Gvili, and disarmament of Hamas in accordance with the agreed framework.
We commend the US-led Civil-Military Coordination Center for Gaza (CMCC), in which Cyprus and Greece participate, for achieving, with facilitation by Israel, the milestone for movement of humanitarian aid and commercial goods into Gaza.
We are determined to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches civilians safely, only through the coordinated channels and without being abused by malign actors.
We reiterate Israel’s right to self-defense in accordance with international law and reject unfounded allegations against Israel.
Emergency Response Cooperation
We agree to establish a Trilateral Working Group on Emergency Preparedness and Response, ensuring rapid and effective mutual assistance in natural disasters. We welcome the initiative to establish the Cyprus Regional Aerial Firefighting Station, which aims to enhance regional preparedness and response capacities particularly as regards wildfires.
We will establish a Working Group on Health, strengthening cooperation among our medical institutions in research, innovation, and emergency response.
We further underline the importance of our extensive cooperation in environmental protection and addressing climate change. Our relevant authorities will begin the necessary work on trilateral memoranda of understanding on water and wastewater management and on addressing climate change.
We recall our Implementation Agreement on the Sub-regional Marine Oil Pollution Contingency Plan and agree to hold a joint exercise in 2026 addressing maritime pollution incidents.
Energy, Connectivity, and Regional Prosperity
We reaffirm our determination to advance joint energy projects, including natural gas development, electricity interconnectors, and renewable energy initiatives, as a solid foundation for cooperation in the region, based on international law, including the law of the sea and the respect of all states to exercise their rights in their respective EEZ/Continental Shelf.
We welcomed the recent Joint Statement on the 3+1 Energy Ministerial in Greece in November 2025 with the participation of the United States, and the commitment to promoting energy security and cooperation in the Eastern Mediterranean, including through the Eastern Mediterranean Energy Center, as a key to regional strategic stability and resilience.
We express strong commitment to the Great Sea Interconnector project and agree to work together to advance it.
We will collaborate to promote regional interconnectivity projects, those currently in progress and future ones, within the context of the India–Middle East–Europe Economic Corridor (IMEC), including by establishing working level groups which will convene on a regular basis to realize this strategic objective.
Science, Technology, and Innovation
We agree to further enhance trilateral cooperation in science, technology, and innovation, including through the establishment of a framework to promote joint research initiatives, and to improve coordination in accessing EU Horizon programs and other external funding sources.
We will establish a Working Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI) to explore opportunities for enhanced cooperation, to promote reliable application of AI across mission-critical civilian verticals, high-level computing infrastructure and capacity building.
European and Regional Cooperation
We welcome the upcoming Cypriot Presidency of the Council of the European
Union as an opportunity to enhance cooperation in the Southern Neighborhood, including the Eastern Mediterranean, including contributing to strengthen relations between the European Union and Israel and realize their potential as key partners.
The strengthening and widening of the circle of peace between Israel and the Arab world holds the promise for a more secure and prosperous region. We reaffirm our commitment to expanding the Abraham Accords and agree to intensify joint efforts, together with the United States and other partners, to achieve this goal.
We welcome the recent progress in the dialogue between Israel and Lebanon, adding an economic dimension to the security dialogue. We support the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon, and the importance of ensuring the monopoly of the use of force under legitimate state institutions, in accordance with the decision of the Lebanese Government, UN Security Council resolutions, and the November 2024 understandings agreed to by Israel and Lebanon through US mediation, which could open the path towards normalization between Lebanon and Israel.
We highlight the special significance of Jerusalem for the three monotheistic faiths: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and recall the inherent and deep historical bonds of the Jewish people to its historical homeland. We reiterate our commitment to preserving the Status Quo at the Holy Sites of Jerusalem and stress our strong interest in upholding the presence and heritage of the Christian Churches.
In light of the global surge in antisemitism, including the recent appalling terrorist attacks against Jewish worshipers in Sydney and Manchester, we reaffirm our determination to fight antisemitism in all its forms, including calls for Israel’s destruction and denial of its right to exist.
We also reiterate the importance of religious freedoms, including freedom of worship, and our respective obligations therefrom.
We express our full and unwavering support for a just, comprehensive, and viable settlement of the Cyprus problem, based on international law and relevant UN Security Council Resolutions. Such a solution, which would reunify the island on the basis of respect for democratic principles, human rights and fundamental freedoms of all Cypriots, would not only benefit the people of Cyprus in its entirety, but would also significantly contribute to peace, security and stability in the Eastern Mediterranean and the wider region.
People-to-People Ties
We commit to deepening cultural, educational, and academic exchanges, fostering mutual understanding and friendship among our societies.
We agree to accelerate implementation of existing agreements on environmental education and youth exchanges.
We will enhance cooperation on diaspora relations, utilizing the great potential and vital role of our communities across the globe in strengthening ties among our nations.
