Azərbaycan Respublikasının rəsmi dövlət platforması
Rəsmi vebsaytları necə tanımaq olar?
Rəsmi vebsaytların linkləri .gov.az ilə bitir.
Dövlət qurumları .gov.az domeni (məsələn, edu.gov.az) vasitəsilə əlaqə qurur.
Rəsmi vebsaytların siyahısı
Təhlükəsiz vebsaytlar HTTPS protokolundan istifadə edir.
Əlavə təhlükəsizlik tədbiri kimi, URL çubuğunda kilid işarəsinin və ya https:// prefiksinin mövcudluğunu yoxlayın. Həssas məlumatlarınızı yalnız rəsmi və təhlükəsiz saytlarda paylaşın.
MINISTRY
NEWSFLASH
SOCIAL MEDIA
FAQ
Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti hökumətinin 1918-ci il 28 may tarixli qərarı ilə maarif və təhsil üzrə ilk nazirlik-Xalq Maarifi Nazirliyi yaradılıb. Nazirlər Şurasının 30 iyun 1918-ci il tarixli qərarı ilə Xalq Maarifi Nazirliyinin üç şöbədən (ümumi orta təhsil, ali və orta ixtisas təhsili, peşə məktəbləri) ibarət strukturu təsdiq olunub.
Azərbaycan SSR Xalq Komissarları Sovetinin 28 aprel 1920-ci il tarixli qərarı ilə Xalq Maarifi Nazirliyinin adı dəyişdirilərək Xalq Maarifi Komissarlığı adı ilə yenidən təşkil edilib və ölkədəki bütün təhsil müəssisələri bu qurumun tabeliyinə verilib.
Menu Menu Back
MenuMenu
PORTAL.EDU.AZ
General Education
Is an important area of activity that ensures the acquisition of knowledge, skills and habits by students.
Extracurricular Education
Extracurricular education is a type of education that ensures the development of interests and skills, improvement of intellectual level, creative abilities and physical capabilities of children, teenagers and young people.
Vocational Education
Is a priority area that provides the necessary work skills.
Secondary special education
Provides training of qualified personnel in various arts and mass professions in accordance with the needs of society and the labor market on the basis of general secondary education.
Higher education
Provides highly qualified specialist training based on full secondary education and secondary vocational education, taking into account the needs of society and the labor market.
Special Education
Special education ensures the integration of people with disabilities into society, including their preparation for work and family life, by giving knowledge and skills based on state programs.
Projects
Projects of the Ministry of Education
Assessments and studies
Ongoing research by the Ministry of Education
Verify digital document
Contact
en
az
ru
MINISTRY
NEWSFLASH
Calendar
Contact
Verify digital document ✓
Education is the future of the nation!
All News
A Memorandum of Understanding on scientific cooperation has been signed between Azerbaijan and Israel
As part of the visit of Deputy Minister of Science and Education of the Republic of Azerbaijan Hasan Hasanli to the State of Israel, a Memorandum of Understanding on Scientific Cooperation was signed between the Ministry of Science and Education of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology of the State of Israel. On the Israeli side, the Memorandum of Understanding was signed by the Minister of Innovation, Science and Technology of the State of Israel, Gila Gamliel.
The Memorandum of Understanding provides for the organization of cooperation with the State of Israel in areas such as the implementation of joint research projects between higher education institutions and scientific institutions, joint funding of research projects, exchanges of doctoral students, scientists and teaching staff, the organization of joint events, and activities in other areas.
04.02.2026 - 15:59
Share
More News
Azerbaijan wins “Medal of Excellence” at “WorldSkills Shanghai 2026” international competition
28.09.2026 - 14:25
Azerbaijan is represented at the 10th plenary session of the Council of Europe’s Steering Committee for Education
28.09.2026 - 11:21
Hasan Hasanli meets with the Chair of the Education, Science and Youth Affairs Committee of the Parliament of Georgia
24.09.2026 - 19:57
The Minister attends a high-level event dedicated to the building of safe digital systems for children
23.09.2026 - 15:55
Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Science and Education and OpenAI Expand Cooperation on the Use of AI in Education
23.09.2026 - 09:49
Ministry of Science and Education
146 office@edu.gov.az
Səhifənin son yenilənmə tarixi: 28.01.2026
All Rights Reserved. Please get in touch to use any licensed materials.
SITEMAP
