Yesterday, alongside other ministers here in New York this week, I hosted a session to hear from doctors who have recently returned from Gaza, and the stories they told will stay with me forever.
One told of the screams of toddlers. And a scream of a toddler who she had operated on without full anaesthetics, and how she hoped and prayed that he would not feel pain.
Another told of the seriously malnourished pregnant women, affecting their babies.
And they talked about doctors and nurses whose family members were killed, but who still came back to work in hospitals in unimaginable conditions to help others.
And they told of how the absolute basics of modern medicine, like antibiotics and anaesthetics, things that we around this Council table take for granted for ourselves and our loved ones, were unavailable. Blocked and denied.
And we say the words “humanitarian crisis,” but this is what it means: the pain and the screams of a toddler who cannot get the basic health care that they need.
And only 18 out of 36 hospitals in Gaza now remain open – all of them struggling to operate amidst severe shortages of fuel, medicine, equipment, and staff.
Over 1,700 healthcare workers have been killed in Gaza, more than 300 detained. This is what the catastrophic collapse of Gaza’s healthcare system looks like.
And as we are gathered here, Israeli forces are escalating the conflict in Gaza City, pounding more homes into rubble, sending frightened families scattering.
It is incomprehensible. It is inhumane. It is utterly unjustifiable. And it must end.
All that this action from the Israeli Government will do is make a catastrophic humanitarian situation worse.
More healthcare in crisis.
Harder than ever to get desperately needed aid to those who need it.
More innocent children enduring a man-made famine.
More civilians killed.
But making it harder to get the remaining hostages out.
Hostages who are still being held, who were seized by Hamas on the barbaric terrorist attack of October 7th and are still being held in the most horrendous conditions, prolonging the anguish for their families, and I reiterate our condemnation of Hamas and that barbaric terrorism on October 7th.
I met with some of the UK-linked hostage families again last week. Their ask of all of us is to keep the hostages at the forefront of our minds, to do everything we can, to give their loved ones the chance of coming home, and to achieve a ceasefire that gives them the chance to do that.
And that must be our task.
We know what needs to be done. We need a ceasefire now. We need the release of all the hostages. We need the immediate restoration of aid and support for medical care. And we need a broader framework for the lasting peace.
And I welcome and support mediation efforts being made by the United States, Qatar and Egypt to seek an end to conflict and to seek peace.
We know too that Gaza cannot be seen in isolation from the West Bank. The Israeli government is tightening its stranglehold on the Palestinian economy and continuing to approve illegal settlement construction, including just recently in the E1 area of East Jerusalem, which is a further blow to the viability of the two-state solution, and we urge Israel to reverse these plans.
After two years of bloodshed, I believe the world is united in wanting this awful war to end.
United in wanting all the hostages released.
United in rejection of any role for Hamas in the future of Gaza or the future of a Palestinian state.
United in wanting Israel to unblock aid and end the humanitarian catastrophe.
And united in wanting a better and more peaceful future for the region, with the reconstruction of Gaza, the dignity for its people, and a new era of relations to support their collective security.
And that future must be based on a two-state solution.
The UK’s historic recognition of the state of Palestine this week is part of our commitment to peace.
Part of acting to protect the viability of the two-state solution as the only path to a just and lasting peace and to security for Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Part of rejecting extremist ideas on all sides, which involve too often fantasies of the destruction of the State of Israel or expulsion of the Palestinian population, we reject both of those.
And part of our wider effort to work with partners on a long-term peace, not just to halt the immediate crisis but an advance a pragmatic plan for what comes next.
None of this can happen without an immediate ceasefire, and that is where all of this has to start.
One of the doctors yesterday described the impact on children of growing up in trauma and devastation. And those will be the consequences on generations to come if we do not act now.
We owe it to all of those children growing up in Gaza, across Palestine, across Israel.
We owe it to all of them to build a better future.
The time for peace is now.
