UK concludes ongoing Israel occupation of Palestinian territory unlawful and announces tough new powers against illegal settlement activity, violence, and extremism to protect two-state solution.
New measures will ban imports of goods from illegal settlements and go after individuals and companies that support, facilitate or profit from illegal settlement activity
Comes as Foreign Secretary takes action against Iran, and reaffirms government’s commitment to tackling antisemitism.
Today the UK has set out steps to respond to the deteriorating reality in Palestine, which has seen a sharp rise in settler violence, accelerating settlement expansion, and a persistent failure to hold those responsible for violence to account. These recent developments threaten the viability of prospects for lasting peace, security and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians.
Before becoming Prime Minister, Andy Burnham said that a change of approach was needed to put pressure on the Israeli government for its actions in Gaza and the West Bank. Today the UK is taking action to defend the two-state solution – the North Star of this government’s policy on Israel and Palestine. Under new plans announced today the Government is:
Banning the import of goods from illegal Israeli settlements into the UK;
Taking action on services, creating new designation powers to go after individuals and companies that support, facilitate or profit from illegal settlement activity;
Banning advertising or promotion of land and property in illegal settlements;
Strengthening our existing global human rights sanctions regime to target those who commit serious violations of international humanitarian law, in Palestine, and around the world
Using our existing global human rights regime to sanction several extremist settlers who have supported or incited acts of violence against Palestinian communities.
Today’s announcement comes as part of joint action with France and Canada to restrict trade with settlements. It follows action being taken by partners including Ireland, Spain, the Netherlands and Norway – all of whom either already have measures in place or are taking steps to restrict trade linked to illegal Israeli settlements by banning the import of settlement goods. In the UK, a trade ban has been called for by the cross-party Foreign Affairs Committee.
Speaking in Parliament to outline the new measures, Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband confirmed the UK has independently deemed Israel’s continued occupation of Palestinian territory “unlawful” – in line with a landmark advisory ruling by the International Court of Justice.
The accelerating expansion of illegal settlements is putting future progress towards the two-state solution at significant risk. In the past year alone, the UN have said that 16 Palestinians have been killed by settlers and recorded over 1400 incidents of settler related violence - an average of over 6 incidents a day.
Despite this, this Israeli Government has approved 104 new settlements and permitted tenders for the construction of the E1 mega settlement to go ahead, which as planned would cut through the heart of the West Bank.
The UK government is acting to hold those responsible to account and to protect the only solution which could see Palestinians and Israelis living alongside each other in peace and security.
Prime Minister Andy Burnham said :
In an increasingly volatile world, Britain must be willing to lead. The British people expect it, as do our international partners, and I am determined my government will continue to act in defence of our values.
Today, we are bringing forward targeted measures aimed not at the Israeli people, but in support of the two-state solution - and the prospect of Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace.
The suffering of the Palestinian people is a scar on the conscience of the world. Innocent Palestinians, including children, continue to be killed in Gaza. And there is still a humanitarian crisis, with far too little aid getting in.
That’s why we are acting, and why Britain will continue to act in support of our values.
Speaking to the House of Commons, Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband said:
The two state solution is based on an explicit belief that the only route to security for both peoples is to live side by side in peaceful co-existence with freedom, security and self-determination.
Securing the two-state solution in its fullest form is the North Star of this government’s policy, and indeed of successive British governments over decades.
And it is precisely this belief in the rights and freedoms of the Israeli and Palestinian people that leads many, including me, to a deep sense of shame about what has unfolded in Palestine under the eyes of the international community.
He also said:
Our argument is not with the people of Israel, with whom the UK has unshakeable bonds. Our argument is with the conduct of its government.
And I also want to say emphatically to people in Britain and across the world:
Holding British Jews responsible for the actions of the Israeli Government is antisemitism, plain and simple.
What we seek today is to salvage the only course for peace and security for Israelis and Palestinians - the two state solution.
During the statement, the Foreign Secretary made clear that these measures are in response to the actions of this Israeli government, which threaten the two-state solution, and not the Israeli people. Israel faces existential threats to its security, most severely from Iran. Further measures announced today include the reimposition of major economic sanctions on Iran, as well as bearing down on its network of proxy groups like Hezbollah.
Legislation announced today brings forward new powers to crack down on Iranian shadow fleet vessels, and target Iran’s key sectors including financial, trade, energy, and transport sectors. It will include a ban on investments, financial assistance and correspondent banking with Iranian companies.
This comes after commitments made by the government to further target Iranian nuclear industries and follows the implementation of the ‘snapback’ mechanism last year.
The legislation will also expand the UK’s ability to sanction vessels involved in activities which support Iran’s nuclear programme - strengthening our ability to disrupt the networks and supply chains that enable destabilising activities in the region.
The situation in Gaza remains appalling, with more than 80% of Palestinians confined to approximately 30% of the territory. Many are still unable to access reliable food, water and medical supplies due to continued restrictions to aid distribution.
Since 2023, UK humanitarian support has meant over 1.4 million people across Palestine have been reached with sustained food assistance, more than 830,000 people have accessed improved water, sanitation, and hygiene services across Palestine.
The UK remains committed to protecting wider trade with Israel as well wider academic, scientific and investment links. Today’s announcement is designed to go after those that support the growth of illegal settlements. As these measures are implemented the Government remains committed to protecting trade with Green Line Israel, and will work to design appropriate religious exemptions , including through dialogue with the Jewish community in the UK.
The Government is investing almost £318 million over three years to protect Jewish communities, crack down on antisemitic extremism and hostile state activity, and tackle antisemitism in schools, universities and local communities - reflecting the seriousness of the Prime Minister’s commitment to tackle antisemitism.
During his statement, the Foreign Secretary set out that the UK’s approach would be rooted in international law, civilian protection and the belief that Israelis and Palestinians deserve a future of dignity, security and peace. Hamas must have no role in the future of Gaza or a Palestinian state, and the UK will continue working with partners, including both Israeli and Palestinians, to implement the 20-Point Plan for Peace in Gaza in full.
Notes to Editors
FACT SHEET:
1 - UK legal opinion that the occupation is unlawful.
The UK government has concluded that Israel’s ongoing occupation of Palestinian territory is unlawful, in line with the central finding of the International Court of Justice in its Advisory Opinion.
After carefully considering the Court’s findings, alongside other analysis of the situation in Israel and Palestine, we have now provided clarity on the UK’s position, reflecting our continued commitment to international law and a two-state solution.
Our view is based on the nature and totality of the Government of Israel’s actions in Palestine over many decades: the length of the occupation, Government of Israel’s entrenchment of its control and expansionist agenda via illegal settlements.
2 - Immediate sanctions against perpetrators of settler violence
As part of this package of measures, we have used our existing powers to sanction five individuals who have supported, incited and carried out violent attacks against Palestinians, including communities in the West Bank
This brings to number of people currently sanctioned by the UK as a result of settler activity up to 38.
3 - New measures planned to target illegal settlement activity, violence, and extremism
Goods made in illegal Israeli settlements will no longer be allowed to be imported into the UK under new plans set out by the government.
The advertising or promotion in the UK of land and property in illegal settlements will be prohibited.
The Government will have powers to sanction individuals and companies that support, facilitate or profit from illegal settlement activity.
The measures are focused on settlement-related economic activity, not on people because they are Israeli, Jewish or of any particular nationality or faith. The Government will have appropriate religious exemptions, and will have a dialogue with the British Jewish community.
Today’s announcement comes as part of joint action with France and Canada to restrict trade with settlements. It follows action being taken by partners including Ireland, Spain, the Netherlands and Norway – all of whom either already have measures in place or are taking steps to restrict trade linked to illegal Israeli settlements by banning the import of settlement goods.
4 - Strengthened powers to uphold International Humanitarian Law
We are expanding our Global Human Rights sanctions regime to give the UK stronger and broader powers to respond to serious violations of international humanitarian law, wherever they might happen, including where connected to illegal settlement activity.
Any individual or company involved in illegal settlements, including E1, will be in scope for UK sanctions.
5 - Fresh powers to target Iran’s nuclear programme
In addition to these measures, we have today also introduced new sanctions on Iran’s economy to make it harder for Iran to develop its nuclear programme, alongside new powers to crack down on its shadow fleet.
These sanctions measures follow a commitment we made earlier this year to bring forward further measures targeting Iranian nuclear industries. Today we are introducing legislation to impose these further sectoral measures.
Like all UK sanctions legislation, these measures include targeted exceptions and licensing provisions where necessary to prevent unintended impacts on legitimate activity and wider UK policy objectives. For example, specific licensing arrangements will support the continued operation of the Shah Deniz gas field in Azerbaijan, helping to avoid adverse impacts on European energy security.
Further Information:
Today’s package follows through with action on the statement Joint Leaders’ Statement on the E1 West Bank Settlement Plan: 20 August 2026 - GOV.UK by the PM and other Leaders following this Israeli government’s decision to allow a new major settlement (E1) to go ahead. Not building this settlement has long been a red line for the UK government.
