Help rescue animals from the front line — shop our Companion Collection 🐾
Shop Now
Sign up for our Newsletters→
About
Team
Jobs
Advertising
Store
War
Politics
Business
Russia
Europe
Opinion
Video
Culture
Investigations
War Crimes
Explaining Ukraine
News Feed
Zelensky: Ukraine recognizes both Israel and Palestine, seeks to end suffering of civilians
June 3, 2024 1:17 pm
• 2 min read
Preferon Google
by Martin Fornusek, The Kyiv Independent news desk
President Volodymyr Zelensky speaks during the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore on June 2, 2024. (Ore Huiying/Bloomberg via Getty Images)
Ukraine recognizes both Israel and Palestine, President Volodymyr Zelensky said in Singapore on June 2, calling for an end to the conflict in Gaza.
Kyiv voiced support for Israel after it came under a deadly attack by the Hamas militant organization in October 2023. Tel Aviv's subsequent shelling and ground invasion of Gaza attracted harsh criticism from much of the international community, with the U.N. estimating the Gaza death toll at over 35,000.
When asked by a journalist about Kyiv's support for Israel, Zelensky stressed that Ukraine also offered to help alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and said that the two periods should "not be mixed together."
"Ukraine said that if Hamas terrorists attacked civilians on the first day of their attack on Israel, then Israel has the right to defend itself," Zelensky said during the Shangri-La Dialogue conference.
"And after that, when Israel was in Gaza and there was a humanitarian crisis, Ukraine said: Firstly, we are ready to provide humanitarian aid to Gaza.
"Secondly, we must respect international law. Thirdly, Ukraine recognizes two states, both Israel and Palestine, and will do everything it can to convince Israel to stop, to end this conflict and prevent the suffering of civilians."
The president also said that Ukraine is a "just country that recognizes international laws and the U.N. charter."
Ukraine invited both Israel and Palestine to the upcoming global peace summit in Switzerland as Kyiv is "ready to hear every opinion" of other countries, except for Russia, Zelensky noted.
The peace summit will be held on June 15-16 in the Burgenstock resort in Switzerland.
Ukraine hopes the summit will address several key areas, such as energy security, the exchange of captives, the return of deported children, global food security, and other topics.
read also
Ukrainians trapped in besieged Gaza: ‘We are constantly bombed’
UkraineGazaIsraelGlobal Peace SummitVolodymyr Zelensky
Martin Fornusek
Assistant Editor
The Kyiv Independent news desk
Most Popular
Russian billionaires 'volunteer' to fund state budget after closed-door meeting with Putin, Reuters reports
U.S. peace negotiations with Russia could now involve multi-billion dollar Lukoil deal, NYT reports
Belarus tests a new path back to the West
Plague death triggers quarantine, mask mandates in Russia's Irkutsk region in Siberia
Russian Su-35, Su-34 fighter jets hit by drones at airfield in Adygea, SBU says
News Feed
Tuesday, October 6
12:06 am
US not removing diplomats from Kyiv amid Russian threats, Rubio says.
"(I)f a threat arises that we feel needs to be addressed by a change in posture, we'll do so. We haven't done that up to this point," U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio said.
Monday, October 5
11:18 pm
Russia attacks Kyiv as drone debris falls into residential area, sets cars ablaze.
Russia again targeted Kyiv late on Oct. 5, with drone debris falling into a residential area in Kyiv's Pecherskyi district after air defenses shot it down, reporters on the ground said.
9:26 pm
Ukraine war latest: Kharkiv devastated by Russian glide bombs, children among victims
6:59 pm (Updated: October 5, 2026 8:47 pm)
Ukrainian pilots to soon start training on French Rafale jets, Zelensky says.
France is preparing fresh defense assistance for Ukraine amid relentless Russian aerial attacks, with a new support package expected "soon," Zelensky revealed after his call with French President Emmanuel Macron.
8:25 pm
Putin allows Italy's UniCredit banking group to reorganize, sell Russian subsidiary.
UniCredit, one of the few European banks still active in Russia, announced in May that it plans to sell most of its Russian subsidiary — UniCredit Bank Russia — to a private investor from the United Arab Emirates, while retaining control over its payments arm.
8:14 pm
He fled Maduro's Venezuela. Now he leads Ukraine's South American battalion.
The Bolivar Battalion consists of about 250 soldiers, most of them from Colombia, Chile, and Veneuzela.
6:43 pmPeace talks
Trump's Ukraine-Russia peace gambit begins to unravel. Again
6:08 pmRussia
What does Russia's rising military budget say about its plans for the war?
6:05 pm
Russian drones strike cargo ship in Black Sea, kill captain, Zelensky says.
Ukrainian President Volodymr Zelensky confirmed that a civilian ship was attacked by two Russian drones, adding that it was a Turkish-owned ship transporting corn.
5:57 pm
NATO drafts strategy on repelling Russian attack against eastern flank.
The plan is intended to clarify how NATO would respond to a potential incursion into its territory and reassure the public of the alliance's readiness, according to Bloomberg.
12:20 pm (Updated: October 5, 2026 5:16 pm)
Update: Zelensky's ex-chief of staff Yermak to represent Ukrainian athlete in IOC case, lawyer says.
Heraskevych, who is expected to be represented by Yermak, said on Feb. 10 that he had been barred from using a custom helmet at the 2026 Winter Olympics that honors Ukrainian athletes killed in Russia’s war.
4:59 pm
Children among dozens injured as Russian glide bombs hit Kharkiv, 5 dead.
People are reportedly trapped under the rubble of a residential building in the city.
3:54 pm
Zelensky could celebrate fresh EU accession breakthrough in Brussels next week, source says.
President Volodymyr Zelensky will attend a summit of the EU's 27 national leaders on Oct. 15 if Kyiv is able to unlock the next step in its EU accession process, a Ukrainian official told the Kyiv Independent.
3:32 pm
More than half of Ukrainians say Zelensky should not run for president again, poll says.
The KIIS survey also revealed that 45% of Ukrainians believe their country's affairs are moving in the wrong direction, while 40% think the opposite.
3:26 pm
New automatic gun turrets successfully down first Russian jet-powered drones, Air Force says.
President Volodymyr Zelensky previously announced that twelve such turrets had been installed where Russian jet-powered drones have been particularly active, including around Kyiv.
Show More
Editors' Picks
Trump's Ukraine-Russia peace gambit begins to unravel. Again
Kyiv now feels like a front-line city — but its resolve is holding, for now
Kyiv's bomb shelters are in a dire state. Mayor Klitschko is passing on the blame
Exclusive: Trump's push for a Ukraine energy truce runs into a Putin problem
Support us on Gofund.meSupport us on PatreonBuy Our Merch
Follow us
We are a member center of
Sections
News Feed
Newsletters
War
Politics
Business
Russia
Europe
Opinion
Video
Culture
Investigations
War Crimes
Explaining Ukraine
Featured
War Analysis
Photos
Field Report
Interview
Human Story
Company News
More
About
Contacts
Team
Jobs
Join the team
Advertising
Submit an Opinion
Content Licensing
J-School
Store
Copyright © 2026 The Kyiv Independent
Help Center
Cookie Policy
Privacy Policy
Comments policy
Community Policy
Still here? We have something to ask.
This story exists because readers chose to back it. Behind it is a newsroom that will not look away — and a community of people who make that possible. It's thanks to 35,000 members that our reporting stays free for everyone to read, and we can continue our reporting. Will you be one of them?
MonthlyAnnual
USD
USD
EUR
GBP
CAD
AUD
Continue
Secure transaction
