Remarks by H.E. Cho Hyun
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
Security Council High-level Meeting on
“The Situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question”
New York, September 23, 2025
I thank again the Secretary-General for his briefing.
It is yet another stark reminder that the situation in Gaza stands as one of the gravest challenges to international peace and security.
The immense scale of human suffering and the implications for regional stability demand our urgent and united attention.
This is not an abstract challenge, but measured in lives lost every day.
Nearly two years have passed since Hamas’s terrorist attacks on October 7, 2023.
In that time, more than 64,000 people have been killed. The humanitarian crisis worsens each day, with people in Gaza – particularly women, children and other vulnerable groups –facing constant threats to their lives and safety.
Equally troubling is the famine now unfolding in Gaza.
According to the recent IPC report, more than half a million people are already facing famine.
The crisis is projected to spread to Deir al-Balah(데이르 알 발라) and Khan Younis(칸 유니스) in the coming weeks.
We must prevent any further devastation for civilians already in desperate conditions.
Safe, sustained, and unimpeded humanitarian access must be guaranteed without any further delay.
We call for the immediate lifting of all restrictions on the entry and distribution of humanitarian assistance.
Excellencies,
The Republic of Korea is deeply alarmed by Israel’s ground operation to seize control of Gaza City, which risks further exacerbating an already catastrophic humanitarian crisis.
We are also gravely concerned that its decision to resume construction in the E1 settlement area would threaten to isolate Palestinian communities in the area.
Given the dire situation, upholding international law – in particular international humanitarian law – is imperative.
These rules are not aspirational ideals but binding obligations, designed to safeguard human dignity even in the darkest moments of conflict.
We urge all parties to comply fully with these principles.
In this difficult context, the Republic of Korea remains gravely concerned about Israel’s recent attack in Qatari territory.
This act is unacceptable.
It not only violates the territorial sovereignty of the State of Qatar, one of the key mediating countries, but also jeopardizes ongoing negotiations to achieve an immediate ceasefire and secure the release of all hostages held by Hamas.
We reaffirm our full support for the tireless mediation efforts of the United States, Qatar, and Egypt.
We commend the unwavering commitment of Qatar’s diplomatic mediation, which remains indispensable to ending the cycle of violence and creating a pathway toward stability.
The Republic of Korea also reiterates its steadfast call for an immediate ceasefire and the unconditional release of all hostages.
Securing their freedom, together with establishing a permanent and fully respected ceasefire, are indispensable steps towards a just and lasting peace.
Excellencies,
The Republic of Korea deeply understands the Palestinian people’s aspiration to establish their own state.
We believe that the two-state solution is the only viable pathway to resolve the Israel-Palestine issue and to build lasting peace.
The Korean government will continue to play its due role in the international community’s growing efforts to build peace and stability in the region based on the two-state solution.
Taking all considerations into account, Korea is committed to recognizing Palestinian statehood at a time when it would be genuinely conducive to realizing the two-state solution.
As we deliberate today, let us not lose sight of our common goal: a Middle East where peoples of all walks of life can coexist in peace, security, and prosperity.
Korea stands ready to contribute to alleviating civilian suffering, upholding the principles of international law, and helping to lay the firm foundations of a just and enduring peace for all.
/END/
