03.11.2023
Dear Kassym-Jomart Kemelevich!
Dear Heads of delegations!
I am very pleased to see you again my dears.
I express my deep gratitude to the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, distinguished Kassym-Jomart Kemelevich Tokayev, for organizing today’s summit at high-level.
At the beginning of my address, I will quote the words of our great ancestor Bilga Khoqon, who was one of the founders of the ancient Turkic state: “Oh my Turkic people, return to your roots, know yourself, and thus you shall soar higher!”
These words of wisdom are certainly of great significance in today’s dynamic world, in a time when the Organization of Turkic States is yet improving its activities. The voice of our fraternal peoples, whose language, religion and hearts are inextricably linked, is becoming much louder and more powerful throughout the world.
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere congratulations to the people of Kazakhstan on the recently celebrated national holiday of the country - the Republic Day.
I also sincerely congratulate the President of Turkiye, my brother, His Excellency, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and the entire Turkish people on the 100th anniversary of the Republic Day.
Dear participants of the summit!
You are all well aware that the friendly people of Azerbaijan enjoy their rightful place and great respect in the Turkic world.
In recent years, the nation of Azerbaijan, under the leadership of my dear brother Ilham Aliyev, have achieved enormous successes.
Historical justice has been restored, and enormous results have been achieved in the transformation of the Karabakh region, which is an integral part of the country, into a place of creativity.
In August, I visited the cities of Shusha and Fizuli and personally witnessed the large-scale transformations, construction of modern infrastructure, restoration of destroyed cultural heritage.
Once again, I sincerely congratulate the people of Azerbaijan, on the great victory - full restoration of the territorial integrity of the country.
Dear participants of the summit!
In the new world order and the system of international institutions that are being shaped today, the Organization of Turkic States is occupying yet more uniquely important place.
The territory of our Organization, which is home to 160 million people, is also a land of vast economic opportunities.
I am pleased to say that Uzbekistan has established strategic partnership with all member-states of the Organization.
The major documents signed last year at the Samarkand Summit under the slogan “A New Era of Turkic Civilization: Towards Common Development and Prosperity” are being consistently implemented.
During Uzbekistan’s Chairmanship, more than a hundred different events were held and important initiatives were put forward.
New and more effective mechanisms for practical cooperation were created on the basis of the conceptual programme “Turkic World Vision – 2040”.
In particular, new structures such as the Organization of Trade Unions of the Turkic States, the Association of Notary Offices, the Academy of Space Research, the Geographical Council and the Drought Prevention Institute have been launched.
We have established close relations with several high-profile global and regional structures – the United Nations and its various subsidiary agencies, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Council for Cooperation and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia and the Economic Cooperation Organization.
Despite the growing global economic crisis, our systematic work has resulted in steady growth in mutual trade.
I would like to once again thank all countries and the Secretariat of the Organization, which actively supported us during Uzbekistan’s Chairmanship.
Dear heads of delegations!
We are all witnessing today a deepening global crisis of confidence. New problems are emerging in the provision of global security, and cases of disregarding the norms of international law are increasing.
In particular, it is a matter of grave concern to all of us that the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian problem in the Middle East has become extremely dangerous.
The armed conflict has caused enormous civilian casualties, especially among elderly people, women and children, increasing the danger of conflict spillover.
We call on the parties to immediately stop military actions, ceasefire and for humanitarian purposes come to compromise.
The only and fair solution to this problem is to resolve the conflict on the basis of “two states for two peoples”.
The Palestinian people have the right to an independent state as provided for in the United Nations resolutions.
We need to announce to the whole world our unanimous and determined position on this within our Organization.
Dear participants of the summit!
At our Summit, which is being held under the slogan “Turkic Era”, I would like to make the following proposals for the further development of our multilateral and long-term relations.
First. Our main goal is to strengthen the principles of mutual respect, trust, and openness within the Organization in order to effectively overcome various obstacles together.
In this regard, I believe it is necessary to develop a "Charter of Turkic World" that expresses the unity of the Turkic peoples, their great past and rich culture and ancient values. I propose to draft this unique symbolic Charter with the participation of eminent scholars and experts in this field.
Second. The Turkic Investment Fund will be launched these days.
In order to strengthen industrial cooperation between our countries and implement large investment projects, we should also facilitate the establishment of the Turkic Development Bank in the next stage.
We are ready to host this financial institution in Tashkent.
Third. We fully support the practical work started on the establishment of the Turkic States Trade Cooperation Research Centre.
In the future, building on the capacities of the Centre, we need to jointly implement the following specific measures:
1. removal of trade barriers,
2. widespread introduction of new mechanisms to increase export-import volumes,
3. development of digital trading platforms.
Fourth. The development and diversification of global logistics chains and transport corridors, the formation of a unified transit network are of urgent importance.
We support the measures on increasing capacity of the Middle Corridor to meet the growing demand for freight transportation.
We also support the development of additional multi-network routes, including those corridors, passing through our countries to China, South Asia, and Europe and the digitalization of transport services.
We propose to set up the Council of Railway authorities of our countries. We are ready to host the Directorate of this structure in our country.
Fifth. We are interested in the development of a comprehensive cooperation in the field of ecology.
Since ancient times, our ancestors lived in harmony and coexistence with nature. Regrettably, today we are witnessing the increase in consumeristic approach to nature.
The entire humanity is suffering from various problems caused by climate change.
This situation requires urgent action from all of us.
Undoubtedly, the establishment of the TURKIC ECOLOGY FORUM at the ministerial level will represent a crucial step in this regard.
Such an influential mechanism is in line with our plans to enhance the effectiveness of our organization.
Sixth. The aspiration to elevate the Turkic civilization is directly associated with comprehensive support for technological advancements and progressive knowledge.
I am confident that our creative, talented, and energetic youth will pave the way for a new Renaissance of the Turkic World. The scientific discoveries and spiritual legacy left by our great ancestors will provide a solid foundation for their future accomplishments.
It is worth highlighting that member-states are carrying out an extensive work to deeply study the exemplary activity and scientific and creative heritage left by our jadid ancestors who lived in the last century.
To propel these efforts to a new stage, we invite your representatives to take an active part in the International Forum “Jadids: National Identity, Independence and Ideas of Statehood” to be held in our country this December.
Along with this, in order to empower the enterprising and talented youth living in the pursuit of innovation, we believe it would be expedient to establish the Turkic World Creative Youth Centre in Uzbekistan.
Esteemed heads of delegations!
The establishment of peace and tranquility in the multiethnic land of Afghanistan, which for millennia has been intertwined with the historical and cultural ties of the Turkic peoples, is the main condition for ensuring strategic stability and security in our region.
However, in the current global context, marked by conflicts and wars in various parts of the world, this problem has increasingly slipped out of the attention of the international community.
We urge not to reduce humanitarian aid to the Afghan people and call for the development of specific measures to address the acute social problems in this country.
We need a peaceful and stable Afghanistan that is actively engaged in regional partnership and economic cooperation with all of its neighbors.
Our initiative to construct the Trans-Afghan railway precisely serves this noble purpose.
Uzbekistan will continue to provide necessary assistance to the Afghan people. Through the logistics hub in Termez, we facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid, while our Training Center remains actively engaged in providing education to Afghan citizens.
Dear friends!
Taking this opportunity, I wish every success to the esteemed President of the Republic of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Kemelovich Tokayev, who is accepting the Chairmanship of the Council of Heads of State.
I believe that the important documents and decisions adopted today, including the Summit Declaration and the Astana Act, will be the next bold step of our countries towards a bright Turkic future.
There is no doubt that our brotherly nations who throughout the history have withstand numerous trials and found join solutions will secure great accomplishment in the future as well.
Thank you for your attention.
