Member States Rally to Salvage Two-State Solution
A high-level General Assembly conference on the future status of Palestine concluded today with groundbreaking momentum as Heads of State and Government and other senior officials from 10 countries announced their recognition of an independent State of Palestine.
Co-chaired by France and Saudi Arabia, the “High-Level International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution” re-opened for its last plenary meeting as part of the eightieth session of the General Assembly, building on a three-day segment held in July.
Emmanuel Macron, President of France, opened today's gathering, declaring recognition of the State of Palestine as “a way of affirming that the Palestinian people is not a people too many”. Further, recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people “takes nothing away from the rights of the people of Israel, who France supported from day one”, he said. While “some might say it’s too late, others might say it’s too early” for recognition, he stressed “we can no longer wait.”
Noting the 7 October 2023 attack “remains an open wound for the Israeli soul and for our universal conscience” and condemning it unequivocally, he affirmed “you cannot show weakness in the face of terrorism” but “we also know the perils of endless wars”. Recognition “is a defeat for Hamas”, he said, noting that Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Portugal, San Marino and the United Kingdom would be among those recognizing the State of Palestine today.
Calling for the release of 48 hostages and an end to military operations throughout Gaza, he recalled that President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority had condemned the terrorist attacks of 7 October, reiterating his commitment to disarming Hamas and excluding them from future governance. Further, France and its European partners will be indexing their level of cooperation with Israel to measures that State takes to end the war and negotiate peace, while expecting Arab and Muslim partners to recognize the State of Israel. With the State of Israel being “self-evident”, it is time to recognize the State of Palestine and “cast out from these lands the vile face of terrorism and to forge peace”.
Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, speaking on behalf of Crown Prince and Prime Minister Mohammed bin Salman, said that Israel’s ongoing aggression against Palestinians, as well as against the sovereignty of Arab and Muslim countries, undermines peace efforts in the region. He stressed that “the two-State solution is the only way to achieve a just and permanent peace.” The historic recognition of the State of Palestine by France and many other countries, as well as the broad support for adoption of the New York Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution reflects the international community’s will to “render justice to the Palestinian people and consider their legal historic right”.
The New York Declaration (document A/CONF.243/2025/1) — the outcome document of this International Conference endorsed by the General Assembly — commits to taking tangible, timebound, and irreversible steps for the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine and the implementation of the two-State solution, and to achieve, through concrete actions, as rapidly as possible, the realization of an independent, sovereign, economically viable and democratic State of Palestine living side by side, in peace and security with Israel.
Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State of Palestine, speaking via videoconference, said the historic Declaration “marked the beginning of an irreversible path towards ending the humanitarian catastrophe and ending occupation” and was “the embodiment of an independent State of Palestine”. He called for a permanent ceasefire, guaranteed humanitarian access through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and the guaranteed release of all hostages and prisoners with the withdrawal of the occupation forces in Gaza.
Hamas “will have no role in governing”, he underscored, and together with other factions, must surrender weapons to the Palestinian authority. “We stress our condemnation of the occupation’s crimes. We also condemn the killing and detention of civilians, including Hamas’ actions on October 7, 2023,” he emphasized. Calling for an end to the settlements and annexation, he underlined a commitment “to organize presidential and parliamentary elections after the end of the war,” drafting an interim constitution within one year.
Voicing appreciation to all countries who have recognized the State of Palestine and calling on those who have not to follow suit, he noted: “We have already recognized the right of Israel to existence in 1988 and in 1993,” he said. Addressing the Israeli people, he said: “Our future and yours banks on peace.” He also wished “all Jews in the world” a “good new year”. Addressing the Palestinian people, he said: “The dawn of freedom and liberty is coming,” the day of the State of Palestine.
As the floor opened for remarks, nine more States came forward with their recognition of Palestine as a sovereign State with full rights. Among them was Anthony Albanese, Prime Minister of Australia, recalling that in 1947, his country was “the first member of the United Nations to vote for the plan that made the modern State of Israel possible”. “But that plan always encompassed two States — the State of Israel and the State of Palestine,” he emphasized. He noted that Australia’s recognition of the State of Palestine was predicated on commitments from the Palestinian Authority, including reaffirming Israel’s right to exist in peace and security, and that Hamas will never control Gaza again.
Bart De Wever, Prime Minister of Belgium, agreed on that final point, stating “this step cannot be a reward for Hamas”. His country will only proceed to the legal recognition of the State of Palestine, once all hostages have been released and all terrorist organizations, such as Hamas, have been removed from the governance of Palestine, he added. Echoing the demand that Hamas play no role in future governance of Palestine, Mark Carney, Prime Minister of Canada, declared recognition, observing that the current Israeli Government is working methodically to prevent the prospect of a Palestinian State from ever being established. Offering his country’s full partnership in building a peaceful future for both the State of Palestine and the State of Israel, he denounced Israel’s expansion of settlements and soaring settlers’ violence.
Robert Abela, Prime Minister of Malta, confirming his official recognition of Palestine, emphasized “a demonstration of our concrete commitment to a genuine and peaceful two-State solution” while remaining unequivocal in its support for the right of Israel to exist alongside a democratic Palestinian State. Further calling for the unconditional release of all remaining hostages — “No ifs, no buts” — he described a two-State solution as “the worst possible outcome for Hamas”.
Others declared recognition noting that prospects for a two-State solution were in profound peril, amid a worsening crisis in Gaza, including Imma Tor Faus, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Andorra, and Yvette Cooper, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, President of Portugal, stated that without action, the Gaza crisis will leave scars for generations, fueling extremism. “Our message is clear: recognition of the State of Palestine is recognition of peace itself — now, today. Tomorrow would have been too late”, he affirmed. Prince Albert II of Monaco and Luc Frieden, Prime Minister of Luxembourg, were also among those announcing recognition of Palestine. “The State of Palestine has been recognized by the majority of European Union member States,” underscored António Costa, President of the European Council and President of the European Commission.
Meanwhile, some delegations, including Antonio Tajani, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, expressed their principled support for a two-State solution without formal recognition of the State of Palestine. Takeshi Iwaya, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, said that “the issue of recognizing a Palestinian State is not a matter of ‘if’ but of ‘when’”. “Should Israel take further actions that block the path to the realization of a two-State solution, Japan will be compelled to introduce new measures in response,” he warned. The conflict can “neither be won nor managed. It needs to be resolved”, underscored Johann Wadephul, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, adding that his country does not and will not recognize any changes to the 1967 borders and also remains deeply committed to Israel’s existence and long-term security.
For his part, Abdullah II bin Al Hussein, the King of Jordan, stressed that the war in Gaza must end, humanitarian aid must flow unhindered, and all settler violence in the West Bank must end. A clear choice stands before us, he stated: “To continue down the dark and bloody path of war and conflict, or to take the path of peace through the two-State solution.”
Also addressing the Conference was UN Secretary-General António Guterres, who stressed that a two-State solution is “the only way out of this nightmare.” He called once again for an immediate and permanent ceasefire; the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages; and unconditional, and unhindered humanitarian access.
For her part, Annalena Baerbock (Germany), newly-elected President of the General Assembly, emphasized that the international community is not only committed to the two-State solution but “identifying tangible, timebound and irreversible steps for its realization”. Member States owe it to “all the children of Palestine and Israel” so that they “may not inherit rubble, grief and despair — but safety, dignity and hope”.
