INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
APPLICATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION AND
PUNISHMENT OF THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE IN THE GAZA STRIP
(SOUTH AFRICA v. ISRAEL)
DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION BY
THE REPUBLIC OF FIJI
March 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION BY FIJI ................... .. ... .. ............. .. ........ ...... .......... ....... ........ ............... ....... ... 3
I. FIJI ISPARTY TO THE CONVENTION ....................... ..... ............ ............... .. ... ........... ... ... .. .... ............ ....... ........ .... .. 4
II. PARTICULARS OF THE CASE AND CONVENTION .... .... ..... ........... ...... ... ........ ...... ..... ... .... .... .... .... ... .... .. ... .. ... .. .. 5
III. PROPOSITIONS OFFERED BY FIJI IN THIS INTERVENTION ......... ....... .. .... ... .. .......... .. ... .. .. .... .. ... .. ... .. .... ... .. 6
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION .. ........... ....... ....... ...... .... ... .. .. .. .... .. .... ... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. 8
IV.A. Construction regarding Right oflntervention ................................ ....................................................... .. .... 8
IV.B. Construction regarding Substantive Provisions of the Convention .............. .. ........ ... ....... ............ .... ........... 8
IV.B.1. General Criteria for Treaty Interpretation ...... ....... .. ....... ................... .... ....... .................. ...... ..... .... .. .... 9
IV.B.2. Unacceptable Vague New Notion of Holistic Treaty Interpretation ........ ......................... .................. 10
IV.C. Questions of How to Weigh Evidence of Crimes under the Genocide Convention .......... .. ......... ... .......... 11
IV.C.l. Standard ofProof ................................................................................................. .............................. 11
IV.C.2. Burden ofProof ..... ....... ........ .. .. .... .... ... ............ ........... .............. ...... ......... .... .. .... ........ .. .. ........ .. ... .. ....... 13
IV.C.3. Due Weight must be given to National Military Reports .................................................... .......... .. .... 14
IV. C. 4. Mistaken Reliance upon UN Reports ............... ................................................................. ... ............... 15
IV.C.5. What Weight to be given to NGO Reports? ...................................... .... ................... ... .. .. .................... 18
IV. C. 6. What Weight to be given to Inferences from not giving International Access? ........ .. ..... ...... ...... .. ..... 20
IV.D. Article I - General Obligations ............................................ ............... ........................... ......... ............ ...... 21
IllD.l . Armed conflict and Humanitarian Law ............................ .. ......................... .. ..................................... 21
IV.D.2. Protected Groups ........................................................................................ ................. ....................... 23
IV .E. Article II - Acts of Genocide ...................... ..... ............ ........ ... .. ..... ... .. ............. .. ...................... ............... .. . 24
IV.E.l. Mens Rea ofActs of Genocide ................. .............. .... ....... .. ....................... .. ......... ........... .. ........ ......... . 24
IV.E.2. Actus Reus of Genocide ............... .. ....... ...... ...... ......... ...... ............... .. ................. .......... ........................ 27
V. DocUMENTS IN SUPPORT OF THE DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION ..... .... ..... ...... .. ..... ..... ................................. 29
LIST OF AllJIIJI!XES ..................................................................................... .............................................................. ~O
ANNEX 1 - Registrar' s Notification ..... .. ..................... ............. ... ............. .................... .......................... ................... 31
ANNEX 2 - Accession of Fiji ....................................... ......... .... ....... .... ...... ........... .... ......................... .... ... ............... ...... 33

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
APPLICATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION
AND PUNISHMENT OF THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE IN THE
GAZA STRIP (SOUTH AFRICA v. ISRAEL)
DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION BY FIJI
To the Registrar, International Court of Justice, the undersigned being duly authorized
by the Government of the Republic of Fiji ("Fiji"),
1. On behalf of the Government of Fiji, I have the honour to submit
to the Court a Declaration of Intervention ("Declaration") pursuant to Article
63(2) of the Statute of the Court, in the case concerning the Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the
Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel).
2. Article 82(1) of the Rules of Court, provides: "A State which
desires to avail itself of the right of intervention conferred upon it by Article 63
of the Statute shall file a declaration to that effect, signed in the manner provided
for in Article 38, paragraph 3, of these Rules. Such a declaration shall be filed
as soon as possible, and no later than the date fixed for the filing of the Counter
Memorial."
3. Article 82( 5) of the Rules of Court provides that the declaration
filed by a State wishing to avail itself of the right of intervention must specify
the name of an agent, the case and the convention to which the declaration
relates, and contain:
a) particulars of the basis on which the declarant State considers itself a
party to the convention;
b) identification of the particular provisions of the convention, the
construction of which it considers to be in question;
c) a statement of the construction of those provisions for which it
contends; and
3

d) a list of documents in support, which documents shall be attached.
4. Fiji avails itself of the right conferred by Article 63(2) of the
Statute to intervene in the proceedings in the case concerning the Application
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel). The present Declaration meets the
requirements set out in Article 63 of the Statute and Article 82 of the Rules and
is, thus, admissible.
5. Fiji reserves the right to supplement or amend this Declaration,
and any Written Observations submitted with respect to it, as it considers
necessary in response to subsequent developments in these proceedings.
6. Fiji has appointed H.E. Amb. Filipo Tarakinikini as Agent for
the purposes of these proceedings. It is requested that all communications to the
Declarants in this case be sent to the following address:
H.E. Amb. Filipo Tarakinikini
Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
801 2nd Avenue
20th floor New York,
NY 10017 USA
Phone: (212) 687-4130
Email: rnission@fijiprun.org
I. FIJI ISPARTY TO THE CONVENTION
7. This Declaration is filed as Fiji's exercise of its right of
intervention conferred by Article 63(2) of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice in its capacity as Contracting Party to the 1948 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide ("Genocide
Convention"). This Declaration addresses each of the requirements under
Article 82(5) of the Rules of Court and is filed at the earliest opportunity
reasonably available to the Government of Fiji, in accordance with Article 82(1)
of the Rules of Court. ln accordance with Article 82( 1), the Declaration is
signed in the manner provided for in Article 38(3) of the Rules, by the Agent of
Fiji.
4

8. The United Kingdom acceded to the Genocide Convention on
30 January 1970 and Fiji became independent from the United Kingdom on 10
October 1970. Fiji became a party to the Genocide Convention, by succession
from the United Kingdom, on 11 January 1973, as registered by the UN Office
of Legal Affairs on 13 January 1970. Fiji has made no reservation or declaration
to the Convention, nor objected to a reservation made by any other party.
Accordingly, the requirement stipulated in Article 82(2)(a) of the Rules is met.
9. The Government of Fiji contends that the case at hand raises
concerning issues of the construction of provisions of the Genocide Convention,
and that Fiji accordingly has a right to intervene pursuant to Article 63 of the
Statute. Fiji recognises that the construction of the Genocide Convention to be
rendered in the Court's judgment will be equally binding upon Fiji.
II. PARTICULARS OF THE CASE AND CONVENTION
10. On 29 December 2023, South Africa filed in the Registry of the
Court an Application Instituting Proceedings against the State oflsrael alleging
violations by the latter, in the Gaza Strip, of its obligations under the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
11. In its Application, South Africa submitted that,
" ... the conduct of Israel - through its State organs, State agents,
and other persons and entities acting on its instructions or under
its direction, control or influence - in relation to Palestinians in
Gaza, is in violation of its obligations under the Genocide
Convention." 1
12. South Africa's Application instituting proceedings
("Application") was accompanied by a Request to the Court for the indication
of provisional measures. On 26 January 2024, in response to the Request of
South Africa, the Court made an Order indicating provisional measures. 2
13. On 6 February 2024, as provided in Article 63(1) of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice, the Registrar notified Fiji, as party to the
1 Application instituting proceedings submitted by South Africa on 29 December 2023.
2 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of26 January 2024.
5

Genocide Convention, that the Genocide Convention had been invoked (see
Annex 1).3
ill. PROPOSITIONS IN THIS INTERVENTION
14. State parties to the Genocide Convention have an interest to
contribute to a proper understanding of the scope of the Convention, including
the meaning of the obligation to prevent genocide and the intention to commit
genocide. The Court has never been called upon before to define the scope of
the Convention in the context of intense urban warfare. Fiji wishes to take this
opportunity to intervene to address these issues because it is our contention that
this question will remain topical even after the Court delivers its judgement in
the case concerning the Genocide Convention currently before it in The Gambia
v Myanmar. The war between Hamas and Israel raises specific issues
concerning combatants embedded within civilian infrastructure, the use of
civilian shields, civilians directly participating in the hostilities, civil-military
dual use objects and especially combatant strategies employing massively
amassed civilian shields. This situation comes before the Court as a novel
problem in application of the Genocide Convention. It is, therefore, important
that intervening States be given the fullest opportunity to present their views on
these matters. The Court's interpretation and application of the Genocide
Convention in the context of urban armed conflict, and especially concerning
an apparent strategy of deliberate use of civilian infrastructure for the conduct
of hostilities in order to maximise civilian casualties if the opponent defends
itself, will have considerable implications for the conduct of armed conflicts by
States anywhere in the urbanised world. It is Fiji's concern that a more lenient
and expansive interpretation of the Genocide Convention, as proposed by South
Africa and certain states and NGOs, will endanger future peacekeeping
operations and participation by States in legitimate urban warfare operations by
diminishing the incentive for States to assist therein. For example, if a State
were willing in principle to participate in an international peacekeeping force,
for instance to disarm a terrorist organization, but were thereby to become
3 Letter No. 161308 dated 6 February 2024 to States Parties to the Genocide Convention (except South Africa
and Israel) from the Registrar of the International Court of Justice.
6

vulnerable in this scenario to genocide charges brought by the organisation's
supporting States, then the peacekeeping State would be reluctant to volunteer
its military forces. This outcome would impair both peacekeeping operations
and could seriously impair the integrity and purpose of the Genocide
Convention.
15. Fiji regularly provides armed forces for United Nations
peacekeeping. Like all professional armed forces, our military utilises reporting
equivalent to what would be described by many States as After-Action Reviews
(' AARs '). These serve to ensure that military operations comply with domestic
and international law, while providing a framework for command
accountability and operational effectiveness. They are critical in evaluating
adherence to international humanitarian law and the Rules of Engagement that
apply to our military operations. Fiji is concerned that depreciating the weight
accorded to, or even enabling disregard for, AAR-style military reports by the
Court will undermine the purpose, significance and utility of post-action
military reporting, thus undermining military compliance and accountability.
This undermining of military reports is a legal danger posed to all professional
armed forces worldwide. The experiences, concerns and perspectives of Fiji
offer the Court insights that can help frame its legal considerations in this case.
If the Court affords us an opportunity, we will expand on the distinctions to be
drawn between military reports of different types and sources and will address
the distinctions between various military report systems.
16. Finally, Fiji suggests that the Court might, in cases concerning
State Responsibility for genocide, whereby an appropriately high evidentiary
standard is applied, require that the criminal evidence brought before it be no
less probative than in serious criminal cases. In the Bosnia and Herzegovina v
Serbia and Montenegro and in the Croatia v Serbia and Montenegro genocide
cases brought before this Court, an international criminal tribunal had
previously conducted hearings and had established on the basis of evidence
provided by prosecutors and defendants, subject to criminal procedures that
provided for cross examinations and appropriate protection of defendants' and
victims' rights, that criminal culpability was proved on the facts beyond a
reasonable doubt. For example, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Yugoslavia ("ICTY") had already rendered judgements relevant to the Bosnia
7

Herzegovina case before the Court, such as the ICTY Krstic case, on which the
Court relied in 2007.4 This Court can apply no lesser standards.
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION
IVA. Construction regarding Right ofIntervention
17. South Africa invokes Article IX of the Convention as the basis
for the Court's jurisdiction in this case. Fiji contends that, with regard to the
admissibility of declarations of intervention, the Court held in its Order of 5 June
2023 in the Ukraine v. Russia Genocide case that:
"The Court does not consider that it must decide on the existence
and scope of the dispute between the Parties before ruling on the
admissibility of the declarations of intervention. Article 63 of the
Statute gives States a right to intervene whenever the construction
of a multilateral convention is in question, and Article 82,
subparagraph 2 (b) of the Rules of Court provides that a State
seeking to intervene must identify 'the particular provisions of the
convention the construction of which it considers to be in
question'. " 5
Moreover, responsibilities set out in the Genocide Convention are qualified as
erga omnes, to the international community as a whole, 6 and erga omnes partes,
to all parties to the Genocide Convention, 7 including by South Africa and Israel
to Fiji.
!VB. Construction regarding Substantive Provisions of the Convention
4 International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia v Radislav Krstic (ICTY IT-98-33), was the first case of
conviction for genocide at the ICTY.
5 Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Ukraine v. Russian Federation), Admissibility of the Declarations ofIntervention, Order of 5 June 2023, para.
68.
6 Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 1970, p. 32, para. 33;
Apphcatwn oj the Conventzon on the l'reventwn and l'unishment of the Crime of Uenocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 47, para. 87.
7 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v.
Myanmar), Provisional Measures, Order of23 January 2020, I. CJ. Reports 2020, p.17, para. 41; Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar),
Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2022, pp. 515-518, pars. 107-113.
8

18. Fiji identifies the following prov1s1ons of the Genocide
Convention the construction of which is in question in the present case, as
required under Article 82(5)(b) of the Rules of Court:
• Article I - General obligations
• Article II - Definition of the crime of genocide
• Article III - Acts punishable under the Convention
• Article IV - Duty to punish persons committing genocide
• Article V - Obligation to enact legislation
• Article VI-Trial of persons charged with genocide
IV.B.1. General Criteria for Treaty Interpretation
19. In the Bosnia Herzogovina v Serbia Montenegro case, the Court
laid down the accepted principles of treaty interpretation to be used when
interpreting the provisions of the Genocide Convention to attribute State
Responsibility. The international law of Treaties and of State Responsibility
apply:
"In order to determine whether the Respondent breached its
obligation under the Convention, as claimed by the Applicant,
and, if a breach was committed, to determine its legal
consequences, the Court will have recourse not only to the
Convention itself, but also to the rules of general international law
on treaty interpretation and on responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts."8
20. The Court in that case went on to note that Articles 31 and 32 of
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties lay down rules of treaty
interpretation:
"The Court observes that what obligations the Convention
imposes upon the parties to it depends on the ordinary meaning of
the terms of the Convention read in their context and in the light of
its object and purpose. To confirm the meaning resulting from that
process or to remove ambiguity or obscurity or a manifestly
absurd or unreasonable result, the supplementary means of
8 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, IC.J. Reports 2007, pp. 109-110, para. 160.
9

interpretation to which recourse may be had include the
preparatory work of the Convention and the circumstances of its
conclusion. Those propositions, reflected in Articles 31 and 32 of
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, are well
recognized as part of customary international law."9
21. Fiji submits that these accepted international principles of treaty
interpretation apply in the current case. There are no convincing reasons for
departing from these principles, or creating additional or special principles for
Treaty interpretation, or for making an exceptional case of the interpretation of
the Genocide Convention. Indeed, doing so would dismantle the international
law of treaty interpretation.
IVB.2. Unacceptable Vague New Notion ofHolistic Treaty Interpretation
22. Several interventions in this case urge the Court to dismantle the
accepted principles of treaty interpretation by introducing the novel notion of a
so-called holistic approach to treaty interpretation. In Fiji's view, that holistic
approach goes considerably beyond settled law of treaty interpretation and is
especially dangerous to the international rule of law when dealing with the
crime of genocide. The approach departs from ordinary meaning of the terms
of the Genocide Convention. It exhibits disregard for the international rules for
treaty interpretation and the arrogation of a novel framework for genocide
determinations, despite parties in the current case not having given the Court a
discretion to depart from existing rules of treaty interpretation or to decide the
dispute ex aqueo et bono.
23. The interventions before the Court in this case propose a 'holistic
approach' that seems to reinterpret the meaning of genocidal intent. The proving
of the existence of dolus specialis, the specific intent unique to committing of
genocide, is the fundamental differentiating element of genocide. It follows that
the so-called holistic approach to treaty interpretation for the Genocide Convention
undermines the distinctive character ofthe prohibition against genocide in international
law. It dismantles the distinctive intent essential to the framework and structure of the
prohibition on genocide.
9 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007, pp. 109-110, para. 160.
10

24. Fiji therefore respectfully requests that this so-called holistic
approach to interpretation of the Genocide Convention be disregarded.
IV C. Questions ofHow to Weigh Evidence of Crimes under the Genocide
Convention
25. Pursuant to Article 63(1) of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, intervenors can make submissions to the Court concerning the
construction of a convention to which they are parties. Thus, interventions are
confined to questions of treaty interpretation and application. Fiji understands
that the Court may not consider any evidence related to the merits of a dispute
offered in the submissions of intervenors. To the contrary, the Court is obliged
to disregard submissions, or the parts thereof, that adduce evidence or address
the merits of a case.
26. Fiji acknowledges that it may not make assertions of evidence
relating to factual elements in its submission and does not seek to do so. Rather,
in this section of its submission, Fiji seeks to address issues concerning how the
Genocide Convention requires that evidence be considered as a matter of law
in a manner consistent with the plain meaning of its provisions. This section
discusses general, abstract or procedural questions flowing from proper
interpretation of the Genocide Convention. This is distinct from merely arguing
the merits and facts in evidence, as it instead concerns judicial questions and
issues of law governing admission and weighing of evidence under the
Genocide Convention. Fiji seeks to identify and mitigate possible structural due
process risks in the Court's fact-finding approach. Broad issues of concern
include: standard of proof, burden of proof, and the variable weights attributed
to diverse sources of evidence from military reports, UN reports, NGO reports
and from diplomatic relationships.
IVC.l. Standard ofProof
27. In Croatia v Serbia Montenegro, the Court required a high
standard of proof that is "fully conclusive" 10, adducing "persuasive and
10 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime ofGenocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, I CJ. Reports 2015, para 178.
11

consistent evidence" 11 for a pattern of facts g1vmg rise to an inference of
genocidal intent. Similarly, in the Bosnia and Herzegovina v Serbia
Montenegro case, mention was made of the requirement for a "conclusive
standard" that could "only point to the existence of such intent". 12 This
requirement for absolute certainty implies a standard of proof that is at least
equivalent to, and possibly exceeds, the criminal standard of proof 'beyond
reasonable doubt'.
28. In the Court's 2026 hearing of the proceedings between The
Gambia v Myanmar concerning interpretation and application of the Genocide
Convention, Judge Hmoud formulated an important question concerning
whether individual responsibility and State Responsibility for genocide are
distinct regimes, such that the genocidal do/us specialis differs when attributing
it to an individual or to a State. In the view of Fiji, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide specifies that genocide is
a crime, in its title, and its preamble( .. " Genocide is a crime under international
law " ... ) and in Article 1. 13 The Genocide Convention and statutes of
international criminal tribunals such as the International Criminal Court each
characterise genocide as a crime. Accordingly, any finding of genocide as a
"state crime" by the International Court of Justice must be based upon the level
of proof "beyond a reasonable doubt" similar to the assessment process
undertaken by international criminal tribunals. State culpability for a crime
should require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of commission of this crime,
especially for a crime so grave as genocide.
29. When State conduct may be implicated under allegations of
genocide, it cannot mean that a lower standard of proof applies to the State.
Otherwise, international criminal jurisdiction over crimes of genocide would
become functionally superfluous, if such cases can be brought instead before
the International Court of Justice, where the standard of proof required in the
latter is de facto the same or even lower than would be required in international
11 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime ofGenocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, para 242.
12 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007, paras. 188, 195,219.
13 Article 1, Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide: "The Contracting Parties
confirm that genocide, whether committed in time of peace or in time of war, is a crime under international law
which they undertake to prevent and to punish."
12

criminal tribunals. This legal question in the interpretation of the Genocide
Convention is fundamental to this Court, now that it faces more genocide cases
of this kind.
30. Only when criminal culpability for genocide is established
'beyond a reasonable doubt', can State Responsibility then be assessed to
determine, whether there can be attribution of the acts to the responding State
and a failure by the responding State to fulfil its Genocide Convention
obligations. The prerequisite criminal conduct, however, as proscribed under
the Genocide Convention, is clearly graver and more condemnable than
liabilities for breach of treaty obligations; indeed, it is explicitly criminal, which
reasoning implies the highest evidentiary threshold. That threshold must be
crossed prior to a determination of State Responsibility.
IVC.2. Burden of Proof
31. In the view of Fiji, the implication of the foregoing difference
between the burden of proof for criminal responsibility and for civil
responsibility should be considered by the Court when assessing the evidence
tendered to prove commission of the crime of genocide. In cases concerning
individual criminal culpability for committing genocide, the burden rests upon
the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant has the
presumption of innocence. Similarly, when an applicant before the Court
produces circumstantial evidence as the basis for inferring genocidal dolus
specialis, that inference can be rebutted by the production of other reasonable
motives or objectives that explain legitimate military action as distinct from
'genocidal' conduct. It then falls upon the applicant to refute beyond a
reasonable doubt that there were no other reasonable motives or objectives.
32. The production of proper military reports, equivalent to AARs,
by the respondent could serve to refute an initial accusation and to shift the
burden of proof back to applicant. Thus, if a genocide allegation is made in an
applicant's memorial, then the burden of proof should be shifted back to the
applicant in the event the respondent is able to produce military reports which
prima facie refute the genocide allegations by showing other reasonable
motives or objectives which, at least in the respondent's reasonable view at the
13

relevant time, complied with international humanitarian law. This should shift
the burden of proof back to the applicant to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
an inference of genocidal dolus specialis. This Court has never been called upon
to answer the question whether military reports produced by the respondent
should be sufficient to make the burden of proof shift back to the applicant in a
genocide case.
IV.C.3. Due Weight must be given to National Military Reports
33. National military legal advisers and services investigate military
situations and construct reports on factual and legal military situations in forms
such as After-Action Reviews (AARs). This military practice is virtually
universal. It is designed to ensure transparency and accountability, to provide
reviews for lessons to be learned and to create accurate historical records.
National military situation reports become irrelevant in the judicial processes of
the International Court of Justice if reports by United Nations bodies are
automatically (as argued in the Myanmar case by the The Gambia) favoured
over them. This is undesirable for at least four reasons: First, if disregarded they
become devalued and may be considered not to be worthwhile, which might
trigger a disincentive on part of the States to dedicate resources to the generation
of this highly valuable reporting system any longer. Second, as noted below,
UN reports utilise secondary evidence and are unreliable. Third, military reports
are often of high quality and cannot generally be treated as if they have lesser
evirlentiary weight or are all the same. Fourth, within national military
establishments, every country has its own military legal system. Assessment of
actus reus and mens rea factors by the Court need to weigh military reports
individually, carefully and heavily when assessing the facts and legality of
military actions. Such assessment should not be based on a general assumption
that military reports are, in themselves, to be considered not to be independent.
34. In the The Gambia v Myanmar case, UN Fact Finding Mission
reports filed under the auspices of the UN Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) were brought for consideration by the Court. These
differ from most UN reports in their factual depth, but not in their methodology,
which is similarly lacking in robust verification and transparent sourcing. For
14

example, the Rohingya victim interviews in the Myanmar Fact Finding Mission
reports are poorly documented and virtually non-verifiable.
35. Thus, there should be differentiations made when adjudicating
the quality and reliability of factual information available in individual military
reports that are put to the Court depending on their origins, sources and
positions within or outside military command structures. This could imply that
military reports in the The Gambia v Myanmar case might have a different
evidentiary weight, as compared to Israeli reports to be provided to the Court in
the South Africa v Israel case, or compared to other reports that will arise in
cases in future.
IV. C. 4. Reliance upon UN Reports
36. The use or application of a so-called holistic approach relies heavily
upon inclusion and consideration of a vaguely wide range of contextual "facts and
circumstances". It is noteworthy that interventions urging use of the holistic
approach have relied upon numerous reports and statements by several United
Nations agencies and officials for these contextual "facts and circumstances".
The UN Reports include those of Special Rapporteurs, Independent Experts and
members of Working Groups. Many of these reports and statements are
unreliable, politicised, and have been proved factually incorrect.
37. As observed by Herzberg in the International Criminal Law Review, 14
Bassiouni was one of the first scholars to take a close examination of the
methodologies and practices of UN fact-finding missions. 15 " ... Bassiouni noted
the inherently political character of the UN and that its human rights
frameworks function systemically as a 'political process"'. 16 ... He also
observed that "Frequently, many mission reports are 'designed to please
influential Geneva-based' 17 NGOs and governments" and that "[t]his reality,
14 Anne Herzberg 'The Role of UN Documentation in Shaping Narratives at the International Criminal Court
and the Implications for the Rights of the Accused' International Criminal Law Review vol 22, 1117-1143
(2022).
15 M.C. Bassiouni, 'Appraising UN Justice-Related Fact-Finding Missions', 5 Washington University Journal of
Law and Policy (2001) 35--49.; in Herzberg 1139. See also B.G. Ramcharan (ed.), 'Introduction to the Original
Edition)' in International Law and Fact-Finding in the Field ofHuman Rights (Brill, Leiden, 2014), p. xix.
16 Bassiouni, supra note 19, p. 38; in Herzberg supra note 18, 1139.
17 Ibid., p. 40.; in Herzberg, supra note 18, 1139.
15

more than anything else, impacts upon the effectiveness and impartiality offact-
finding missions' ." 18 With regards to methodology, in 2001 Bassiouni observed
that 'after fifty years, there is no standard operating procedure for fact-finding
missions'." 19
38. Herzberg then went on to note that "In 2015, the OHCHR issued
[a set of guidelines] 'Commissions of Inquiry and Fact-finding Missions on
International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law: Guidance and
Practice' [20] ... It is unknown, however, if these guidelines are required to be
followed by UNHCR-appointed fact-finding missions and if they are
implemented in practice. It is also unknown to what standards, if any, missions
falling under the auspices of the Secretary General or other UN agencies are
required to adhere.". 21
39. University of Leiden Professor Dov Jacobs has also noted that
UN OHCHR fact-finding reports utilised by the ICC to open an investigation in
the Myanmar/Bangladesh case posed problematic methodological issues
concerning doubts as to 'how the reliability and credibility of such reports were
assessed' .22 He observed that methodological concerns impacted the quality of
these reports: insufficient time, lack of access to relevant information, risk of
bias, and inability to assess and verify sources. 23 He considered that these led to
the 'wholesale adoption of a one-sided narrative about the complex events that
took place in Myanmar' .24
40. Other problems with UN fact-finding missions relate to a lack of
experience and expertise, including in relation to the technical and complex
application of international humanitarian law to military targeting practice in
urban warfare. Furthermore, "[a]s noted by Professor William Schabas, these
reports are political, to 'sound the alarm and alert public opinion at a political
18 Ibid; in Herzberg.
19 Ibid; in Herzberg.
20 OHCR, Commissions of Inquiry and Fact-finding Missions on International Human Rights and Humanitarian
law (2015), www.ohchr.org/DocumentslPublications/CoI_Guidance_and_Practice.pd£.
21 Herzberg, supra note 18, 1140.
22 D. Jacobs, 'Limitations of Using Fact-Finding Reports in Criminal Proceedings: The Case of Myanmar',
Torkel Opsahl Academic £Publisher Policy Brief Series No. 118 (2020), p. l; Imps: www.t0a'p.or2. obs-
puf1l l -iacobs .
23 Ibid., Sections 4-4.3.
24 Ibid.
16

level' ."25 Herzberg notes that, because "these m1ss10ns apply a different
standard of evidence than criminal courts and rely extensively on hearsay,
viewing these bodies as collectors of evidence shifts matters to 'dangerous
ground'. "26
41. As noted, most UN reports rely predominantly upon secondary
sources. It is not possible for the judges of this Court to check thousands of
footnotes in UN reports, such as is required to verify them. For example, the
'Legal analysis of the conduct oflsrael in Gaza pursuant to the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide' conducted by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel,27 relies extensively upon other
UN reports that cross-refer for their sources to documents produced by NGOs
that are of dubious accuracy.
42. Other examples of unreliable derivative data include reports
provided by the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinians in the Near East
("UNRWA") and by the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), and by the Human Rights Council Special Rapporteur on the Situation
of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967. This
matter can be further elaborated upon if Fiji is given the opportunity.
43. Fiji cautions that these types of reports are not produced by a
"disinterested witness," namely "one who is not a party to the proceedings and
stands to gain or lose nothing from its outcome."70 Their provenance is neither
objective, nor informed by facts. Fiji therefore urges that reports and statements by
United Nations agencies and officials be individually carefully and critically
evaluated in order to be weighed as evidence. The Court should not
automatically give special probative status to these reports simply on the basis
that they have been produced by an organ of the United Nations. It is our
contention that much of this purported evidence should be disregarded by the
Court to mitigate structural due process risks in the Court's fact-finding
:.!!, 'lhe lntluence o± the Narrative m lnternahonal Cnmmal lnals,' l,J Hedjord H..ow lnternatwnal L'nmmaJ Law
Webinar Series (l February 2021), www.voun1be.com wnl'ch·1, •a= . Wf lfq,·-L ·z 0 .
26 Jbid; in Herzberg, supra note 18, 1140.
27 Commission of Inquiry: Israeli authorities and Israeli security forces have committed and are continuing to
commit genocide against the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip - Conference room paper (A/HRC/60/CRP.3);
h ttps :/iwww. un. o rg1 un is pa I/ document/ corn m issi on-of- ing u irv-report-genoc icle- in-traza-a-hn:-60-crp-J .
17

approach. There can be no rational doubt that military reports such as AARs
produced outside of the chain of command by liberal democratic states are more
reliable concerning military operational planning, international humanitarian
law compliance considerations and facts on the ground than are most, if not all,
UN reports. The Court should bear in mind that UN agencies established for
humanitarian purposes are generally not mandated or equipped to assess
military operations conducted in the context of armed conflict.
IVC.5. What Weight to be given to NGO Reports?
44. In the 2026 hearing of the dispute between The Gambia and
Myanmar concerning interpretation and application of the Genocide
Convention, Judge Cleveland introduced an important question to the parties
concerning the validity of and weight to be given to NGO reports tendered as
evidence before the ICJ. In the view of Fiji, it must, first, be observed that not
all NGO reports are equal. NGOs vary greatly in their missions, staffing,
resources, partiality, political engagements, relationships with interlocutors,
institutional integrity and familiarity with international law as it applies to use
of military force by States. Second, it must be observed that, in general, if
impartial and reliable evidence is sought by the Court, then the substance of
NGO reports must be treated with great caution rather than accepted as
"conclusive" evidence.
45. Most NGOs have limited access to governmental information,
lack rigorous verification processes and suffer from dubious methodological
robustness. These factors typically mean that their reports require verification
and are not automatically suitable as evidence. For example, scientific,
academic, advocacy, humanitarian, international, grassroots, justice,
revolutionary or religious NGOs have different mission orientations and
political partialities, and their respective reports are each coloured variously by
their mission narrative and circumstances. Even in international criminal
tribunals, NGOs usually advocate for alleged victims and against governmental
authorities (of whatever kind).
46. Amnesty International has been influential in promoting the
"holistic approach" to inferred genocidal intent and its approach is adopted in
18

interventions made to the Court in this case. However, the Court should be
aware that such reports can be based on a cherry-picked selection of statements
made by a small number of public figures such as politicians without providing
reliable contextual information whether they had command, control or influence
over the missions and conduct of the military forces. The making of
unauthorised and ad hoe public comments by individual politicians is not
uncommon in liberal democracies which uphold the freedom of political
expression.
4 7. The Court should be cautious in determining the weight to be
given to NGO reports, particularly when they are integrated into a 'holistic'
approach that would function to reinterpret the meaning of genocidal intent
under the Genocide Convention.
48. It would be remiss if the Court were to take into favourable
account some NGO reports while disregarding others, but without transparent,
rational and systematic justification for its selection. Certainly, criteria based
upon quality and reliability of reports are necessary for selection of them.
Reports by academic experts and by think tanks might be considered to have a
different evidentiary weight to advocacy NGOs. The Court could, when
assessing the value of NGO reports to determine the validity of a genocide
charge, take into account the way the particular NGO is funded as well as the
way it has performed in the past within the political arena of a certain conflict.
In other words, an important factor in this evaluation could be whether a specific
NGO might have engaged in political advocacy against the accused state.
However, the Court would face major challenges in formulating a transparent,
rational and systematic protocol for identifying, evaluating and selecting NGO
reports considered to be mostly reliable. The International Court of Justice is
not yet equipped with operational protocols, resources and expertise for the
painstaking research necessary to determine the veracity of individual NGO
reports, whether based on assessments of their institutional reliability, or on
evaluations of differentials of quality between individual NGO reports based
upon their respective methodologies and care in execution.
19

IV C. 6. What Weight to be given to Inferences from not giving
International Access?
49. In the Court's January 2026 hearing of the dispute in The
Gambia v Myanmar, concerning interpretation and application of the Genocide
Convention, Judge Gomes Robledo formulated another vital question affecting
the use of implied evidence under the Genocide Convention. This concerned
the implied reasons for Myanmar's refusal to grant access to international
bodies that could investigate the allegations against Myanmar and, potentially,
corroborate Myanmar's assertion of facts to be argued in its defence. He noted
the importance of international cooperation in the prevention and suppression
of genocide, quoting, for example, from the Preamble to the Genocide
Convention. Subsequently, Judge Gomes Robledo queried whether inferences
could be implied by the Court against Myanmar for its refusal of access, causing
the Court to infer that it could accord little weight to factual evidence tendered
by Myanmar.
50. Fiji observes that, in relation to information collection and fact
finding by international bodies for the purpose of application of the Genocide
Convention, only limited - if any - evidentiary implication can be drawn from
an accused State's refusal to grant national access to such international bodies.
There are many possible and sound reasons for a State's reluctance to grant
access to international bodies. These include a well-founded apprehension of:
inherent prejudice, dubious investigative methodology, lack of consistently
verified expert qualifications within the investigative body, lack of individual
accountability within the investigative body, international procedural
politicization, and predetermined outcomes.
51. Even where international bodies are mandated by the United
Nations to investigate a national situation, it cannot be denied that such
mandates are results of international political decision-making processes and
that their decision-makers' national geopolitical interest are imprinted upon
them. Especially in an international criminal case in which a criminal intent is
to be mforred !rom e1reum8lanee8 and mu8l be lhe sole reasonable miereuce
available to be drawn (as discussed below concerning mens rea), evidence
based upon inferred implications drawn from a State's reluctance to grant access
20

to international bodies, for which there are many possible reasons, cannot be a
legitimate factor in the Court's weighing of evidence. The same reasoning
applies to establishment of State Responsibility for genocide charges.
Accordingly, it is the opinion of Fiji that it would be an error of law to accord
any evidentiary weight to a political decision by a State not to grant access to
international investigative bodies.
IV.D. Article I - General Obligations
52. The Genocide Convention creates a range of State obligations
relating to the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide. It covers
obligations of result, obligations of conduct and inchoate breaches of
obligations. Fiji notes that some breaches of the Genocide Convention must be
connected to a result of actual genocide. For example, breach of the duty to
punish genocide and complicity in genocide cannot stand alone in the absence
of a finding on the evidence of culpability of an actual genocide, as discussed
below.
IIlD. l. Armed conflict and Humanitarian Law
53. Article I of the Convention seeks to prevent and punish genocide
as a crime under international law "whether committed in time of peace or in
time of war". It is clear that the Genocide Convention is applicable in times of
war, as this Court itself has observed. 28
54. The Court has jurisdiction under the Genocide Convention to
rule only on violations of the Genocide Convention itself, and not on alleged
breaches of international humanitarian law treaties and custom. A determination
whether the principles of international humanitarian law are respected falls
outside the scope of the question whether the Genocide Convention is violated.
The rules of international humanitarian law bear direct relevance to the
commission of war crimes. The latter are not directly applicable to the
interpretation of whether acts of war constitute genocide under the Genocide
28 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime ofGenocide (Croatia v Serbia),
Judgment, I.C.J Reports 2015, p. 68, para. 153.
21

Convention.
55. Moreover, violations of international humanitarian law cannot
themselves prove beyond a reasonable doubt the presence of a genocidal
intention of an accused. Even extensive breaches of international humanitarian
law do not of themselves prove genocidal intent. Logically, however, the
converse is true: evidence of military conduct that complies with international
humanitarian law would indicate that the same conduct could not constitute the
crime of genocide. The reasoning is simply that honoring the rules of warfare
renders logically and functionally impossible the existence of genocidal dolus
specialis.
56. Fiji agrees that: " ... , if claims of genocide were to become the
common currency of armed conflict, whenever and wherever that occurred, the
essence of this crime would be diluted and lost."29 This position was articulated
by Judge Barak in his dissenting opinion before this Court regarding its decision
on Provisional Measures in January 2024. 30 As he noted 'The drafters of the
Genocide Convention clarified in their discussions that -
"[t]he infliction of losses, even heavy losses, on the civilian population
in the course of operations of war, does not as a rule constitute genocide.
In modem war belligerents normally destroy factories, means of
communication, public buildings, etc. and the civilian population
inevitably suffers more or less severe losses. It would of course be
desirable to limit such losses. Various measures might be taken to
achieve this end, but this question belongs to the field of the regulation
of the conditions of war and not to that of genocide_[ 11 1"31
Violations of international humanitarian law occurring in the context of the
armed conflict, must be investigated and prosecuted by the competent Israeli
authorities. ' 32 This is also the legal interpretation supported by Fiji.
57. Moreover, in the event the Court were to take into account in a
29 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime ofGenocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel), Public sitting 12 January 2024, CR 2024/2, p. 24, para. 9.
30 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Aji·ica v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of26 Janua,y 2024, Judge Barakjudgmcnt, para. 26.
31 UN Economic and Social Council, Draft Convention on the Crime of Genocide, Section II: Comments Article
by Article, UN doc. E/447, 26 June 1947, reproduced in H. Abtahi and P. Webb, The Genocide Convention: The
Travaux Preparatoires, Martinus Nijhoff, 2008, p. 231, cited ibid.
32 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of26 January 2024, Judge Barakjudgment, para. 27-8.
22

genocide case the observance of international humanitarian law, accusations
regarding erroneous or even alleged deliberate, reckless or negligent targeting
of civilians must be proved by the applicant. This is necessary because
reframing instances of alleged improper targeting under a so-called holistic
approach as constituting proof of genocide would result in a de facto reversal
of the burden of proof as well as a lowering of the standard of proof of
culpability for genocide. As a consequence, the respondent would be put in a
position where it is required to prove innocence of genocide, constituting an
unjust reversal of the burden of proof and a lower burden of proof than under
international criminal law. Rather, to prove a genocide allegation, the applicant
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt to the Court that attacks on armed groups
were undertaken other than by reason of their individual membership in armed
groups.
JV D. 2. Protected Groups
58. Fiji also observes that armed forces, combatants and terrorists are
not to be considered as protected groups under the Genocide Convention. Thus,
elements of the Gazan population comprising such armed groups as Hamas,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Izz al Din al Kassam brigades, and al Quds brigades are
not protected. Nor are their weapons dumps and other war materiel, command and
intelligence operations, data centers, propaganda and psychological operations,
storage infrastructure and support personnel, whether official or volunteer,
irrespt::dive oftht:: size of sut:h armed groups. Even where tht::y numbt::r in tht:: tens
of thousands, numbers that are comparable to armed forces of many States, these
personnel cannot be qualified as merely civilians. Nor are they generalizable as a
national, ethnical, racial or religious group within the meaning of a protected group
under the Genocide Convention.
59. Alleged genocide needs to be directed against a substantial part
of the protected group, impacting its overall survival in order to be captured
under Article I of the Genocide Convention. As noted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in the Akayesu judgment
"In concrete terms, for any of the acts charged under Article 2 (2)
of the Statute to be a constitutive element of genocide, the act must
23

have been committed against one or several individuals, because
such individual or individuals were members of a specific group,
and specifically because they belonged to this group. Thus, the
victim is chosen not because of his individual identity, but rather
on account of his membership of a national, ethnical, racial or
religious group. The victim of the act is th~refore a member of a
group, chosen as such, which, hence, means that the victim of the
crime of genocide is the group itself and not only the individual."33
The same was affirmed by the ICTY Appeals Chamber in Krstic. 34 In the
Genocide Convention (Croatia) case, this Court explained that:
"Since it is the group, in whole or in part, which is the object of
the genocidal intent, the Court is of the view that it is difficult to
establish such intent on the basis of isolated acts. It considers that,
in the absence of direct proof, there must be evidence of acts on a
scale that establishes an intent not only to target certain
individuals because of their membership to a particular group, but
also to destroy the group itself in whole or in part. "35
60. Fiji considers that armed forces, combatants and terrorists
engaged in armed conflict cannot qualify as protected groups under the Genocide
Convention.
IV.E. Article II-Acts of Genocide
IV.E.l. Mens Rea o(Acts o(Genocide
61. The essence of the Genocide Convention is set out in Article II.
"In the present Convention, genocide means any of the following acts
committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial
or religious group ... ".
62. Fiji submits that Article II sets out a special intent, dolus
specialis, that rises above general intent, mens rea. This distinction is between
the general intent to commit an act of violence, the actus reus, and the additional
specific intent to commit that act to destroy in whole or in part a national
33 Prosecutor v. Akayesu, (JCTR Case No. JCTR-96-4-T), Judgment, 2 September 1998, para. 521.
34 Jnternational Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia v Radislav Krstic(JCTYIT-98-33), Appellate Chamber, para
8-12.
35 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 64, para. 138.
24

ethnical or religious group, i.e. dolus specialis. This dolus specialis is the
essential characteristic of genocide, which distinguishes it from other serious
crimes under international law. 36
63. The Court has clarified that a genocidal dolus specialis must be
present, in addition to the intent required for each of the individual acts
involved. 37 In the Bosnian Genocide case, the Court considered three arguments
made by Bosnia for finding Serbia Montenegro responsible. These were: (1)
attribution to the State of the intentions and actions of perpetrators; (2) the
existence of a State plan formulated by Serbia Montenegro evidencing explicit
intent; and (3) inference of intent from contextual circumstances. 38
64. While the Genocide Convention is silent as to the manner in
which genocide is to be proved, in Croatia v. Serbia, the parties agreed that the
dolus specialis was to be sought, first, in the State's policy, while at the same
time accepting that such intent will seldom be expressly stated. In the current
case before the Court, there is little argument being made on the basis of
attribution or a State plan. In the instance of a State plan, it is necessary that that
there be an explicit policy of genocide, 39 wherein the goal of the genocidaires
is to produce group destruction40 as disclosed by explicit statements by
responsible leaders, documents such as adopted plans or policies. However, this
is not at all evident in the case before the Court41 and is not alleged.
65. The Court accepted the alternative possibility of inferring dolus
specialis from a pattern of conduct in Bosnia-Herzegovina v Serbia Montenegro
2007. However, "for a pattern of conduct to be accepted as evidence of
lgenocidal dolus specialis] ... , it would have to be such that it could only point
to the existence of such intent". 42 Eight years later, in Croatia v Serbia
Montenegro 2015, the ICJ stressed the same point: it should be the only
36 Prosecutor v. Akayesu, (Case No. lCTR-96-4-T), Judgment, 2 September 1998, para. 122.
37 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, IC.J Reports 2015, p. 62, para. 132.
38 Blake van Santen 'Searching for a Plan: Demonstrating Genocidal Intent before the ICJ' International Law
and Politics vol 57 p.155.
39 International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia v Radislav Krstic(ICTYIT-98-33), Appellate Chamber, para
685.
40 Akayesu ICTR para 498
41 Blake van Santen 'Searching for a Plan: Demonstrating Genocidal Intent before the ICJ' International Law
and Politics vol 57 p.155.
42 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, IC.J Reports 2007, pp. 109-110, para. 373.
25

inference that could reasonably drawn from the act in question to infer the
existence of dolus specialis from a pattern of conduct.43
66. Yet various other equally reasonable explanations for the Gazan
death toll might include: tactical and strategic reasons for military conduct other
than intent to destroy the Gazan people, including actions in self-defence, which
is recognized as an inherent sovereign right by Article 51 of the UN Charter,
and other actions in pursuit of necessary concrete and direct military
advantages. In determining the presence of these other reasonable explanations,
the Court should take into account the question whether the responding State
has has taken the extensive precautions required under international
humanitarian law to mitigate civilian casualties. Even in the current South
Africa case, Judge Nolte noted in his declaration in the first provisional
measures decision that South Africa had not sufficiently engaged with the
implications of those precautionary measures which fundamentally negate the
existence of any genocidal intent.44
67. It is Fiji's position that the existence of precautionary measures
to protect civilians and civilian objects could undermine an assumption of
genocidal intent.
68. In response to an applicant's argument asserting a genocidal
dolus specialis, if a respondent can provide prima facie evidence countering
culpability, then the burden of proofreturns to the applicant to prove culpability
beyond a reasonable doubt.
69. Fiji prays that the Court will exercise extreme caution and
extraordmary circumspection in its methodology for assessing evidence alleged
to be probative- by any standard- of the presence genocidal dolus specialis in
this case. Fiji considers that inference of genocidal dolus specialis would need
to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt as the only possible inference. In
drawing such an inference, it would be necessary to weigh heavily evidence of
the accused's compliance with international humanitarian law and it would be
remiss to give any weight to unreliable data produced as part of disinformation
43 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime ofGenocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, IC.J Reports 2015, p. 47, para.
44 Application ofthe Convention on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of26 January 2024, Judge Nolte judgment, Para's 13-14.
26

operations by a party to an armed conflict or by an applicant in its support.
IVE.2. Actus Reus of Genocide
70. Article II of the Genocide Convention contains an exhaustive list
of acts constituting the crime of genocide. The acts listed in Article II of the
Convention constitute the actus reus of genocide:
(a)Killing members of the group;
(b)Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group;
(c) Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions oflife
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole
or in part;
(d)lmposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;
(e)Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group."
71. Under Article II(c), 'deliberately inflicting on the group
conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or
in part' has been seized upon by South Africa and some intervenors for its
potential to deliver a broad and open-ended interpretation that would extend the
definition of genocide. The Court has been assailed with allegations of
widespread and systematic acts by Israel imposing on Gazans conditions of life
which have been designed to bring about their physical destruction, inter alia,
siege, starvation, widespread destruction of civilian and medical infrastructure,
deprivation of food and medical supplies and treatment, and forcible
displacement by means of systematic and widespread deportation.
72. Ilowcvcr, the c011ccpt of circu111stanccs leading to u slow dcuth,
as framed by the ICTY in the Brdanin case, meaning that conditions oflife are
inflicted to physically exterminate part of the group,45 is inapplicable. There is
an additional requirement under Article 11(c) that conditions of life calculated to
bring about a group's physical destruction be imposed 'deliberately' and be
'calculated'. This dolus specialis requirement makes it clear that it must be
established by South Africa that the alleged conduct was calculated as a deliberate
means to physically exterminate the group. This returns us to the lack of
evidence of do/us specialis, discussed above.
45 Prosecutorv. Brdanin (ICTY Case No. lT-99-36-T), Judgment, I September 2004, para. 691.
27

73. Some interventions before the Court have given importance to
the displacement of portions of the Gazan population, particularly from the
northern Gaza Strip, to a humanitarian safe zone in the south, as conditions of
life calculated to bring about physical destruction. However, in Fiji's view, such
acts must be assessed in the context of precautions to protect the civilian
population during a time of war. The ICTY indicated that "forcible transfer does
not constitute in and of itself a genocidal act" and that "the mere dissolution [of
a group] does not suffice".46 Furthermore, in its February 2007 judgment in the
Genocide Convention (Bosnia) case, the Court clarified that:
" ... deportation or displacement of the members of a group, even if
effected by force, is not necessarily equivalent to destruction of that
group, nor is such destruction an automatic consequence of the
displacement. This is not to say that acts described as 'ethnic cleansing'
may never constitute genocide, if they are such as to be characterized as,
for example, 'deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part',
contrary to Article II, paragraph (c), of the Convention, provided such
action is carried out with the necessary specific intent (dolus specialis),
that is to say with a view to the destruction of the group, as distinct from
its removal from the region."47
74. Accordingly, Fiji considers that, in its interpretation and
application of Article II of the Genocide Convention, the Court should critically
evaluate allegations of genocidal acts. This requires critical forensic
examination of United Nations and activist reports and then recourse to
information sources beyond them, to consider independently produced expert
reports. Thus, it is the view of Fiji that Article II( c) is to be applied by forensic
consideration of multiple sources of information sufficiently reliable to form a
basis for judicial decision-making.
75. Fiji considers that the interpretation and application of Articles I
and II affect the entirety of the Genocide Convention. Therefore, the foregoing
views are relevant for the Court throughout its consideration of this case.
46 Prosecutorv. Stakic, (ICTYCaseNo. lT-97-24-T),Judgment, 31 July 2003, para. 519.
47 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007, p. 123, para. 190.
28

V. DOCUMENTS IN SUPPORT OF THE DECLARATION OF
INTERVENTION
76. The following documents are appended hereto in support of this
Declaration of Intervention:
Signed:
Annex 1: Letter Number 161308 from the Registrar to States
Parties to the Genocide Convention, sent pursuant
to Article 63, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
Court, dated 6 February 2024.
Annex 2: United Nations Depository Notification Confirming
Fiji's accession to the Genocide Convention, dated
9 November 1959.
H.E. LAITIA TAMAT A
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF FIJI TO THE UNITED NATIONS
SYSTEMS IN GENEYA AND EUROPE
29

LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex 1
Annex2
Letter No. 161308 from the Registrar to States Parties to the Genocide
Convention, sent pursuant to Article 63, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
Court, dated 6 February 2024 - English version.
United Nations Treaty Series record confirming Fiji's Ratification of the
Genocide Convention, dated 30 January 1970- English version.

ANNEX 1 - Registrar's Notification
LETTER NO. 161308
FROM THE REGISTRAR TO ST ATES PARTIES TO THE GENOCIDE
CONVENTION, SENT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 63, PARAGRAPH 1,
OF THE STATUTE OF THE COURT
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
FEBRUARY 6, 2024
English version
COUR INTERNATIONALE
DE JUSTICE
INTERNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTICE
By email only
161308
Annex 1
6 February 2024
I have the honour to refer to my letter (No. 161010) dated 3 January 2024 informing your
Government that, on 29 December 2023, South Africa filed in the Registry of the Court an Application
instituting proceedings against the State oflsrael in the case concerning Application ofthe Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel) .
A copy of the Application was appended to that letter. The text of the Application is also available on
the website of the Court (
Article 63, paragraph I, of the Statute of the Court provides that:
[w]henever the construction of a convention to which States other than those concerned
in thP. r.~if.' ~rf.' p~rti,,~ ii in 'lllf'itinn, thf' Rf'gi,.trnr "h11ll nntify 1111 '>nr.h Stiltf':S fnrthwith"
Further, under Article 43, paragraph 1, of the Rules of Court:
"Whenever the construction of a convention to which States other than those
concerned in the case are parties may be in question within the meaning of Article 63,
paragraph 1, of the Statute, the Court shall consider what directions shall be given to the
Registrar in the matter."
On the instructions of the Court, given in accordance with the said provision of the Rules of

Court, I have the honour to notify your Government of the following.
In the above-mentioned Application, the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (hereinafter the "Genocide Convention") is invoked both as a basis of the
Court's jurisdiction and as a substantive basis of the Applicant's claims on the merits. In particular,
the Applicant seeks to found the Court's jurisdiction on the compromissory clause contained in Article
IX of the Genocide Convention and alleges violations of Articles I, III, IV, V and VI of the
Convention. It therefore appears that the construction of this instrument will be in question in the
case.
[Letter to the States parties to the Genocide Convention
(except South Africa and Israel)]
Your country is included in the list of parties to the Genocide Convention. The present Jetter
should accordingly be regarded as the notification contemplated by Article 63, paragraph I, of the
Statute. I would add that this notification in no way prejudges any question of the possible application
of Article 63, paragraph 2, of the Statute, which the Court may later be called upon to determine in
this case.
Accept, Excellency, the assurances ofmy highest consideration.
Palais de la Paix, Camegieplein 2
2517 KJ La Haye - Pays-Bas
Telephone : +3 I (0) 70 302 23 23 - Facsimile:+31 (0) 70 364 99 28
Site Internet· wwwicj-cij.org
-2-
Philippe Gautier
Registrar
Peace Palace, Camegieplein 2
2517 KJ The Hague - Netherlands
Telephone: +31 (0) 70 302 23 23-Telefax:+31(0) 70 364 99 28
Website· www.icj-cij org

ANN EX 2-Accession of Fiji
400 United Nations - Treaty Series 1970
ANNEX A
No. 1021. CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION AND PUNISHMENT OF
THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE. ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEM-
BLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS ON 9 DECEMBER 1948 1
ACCESSION
Instrument deposited on:
30 January 1970
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
(With effect from 30 April 1970. With a notification extending the application
of the Convention to the following territories for whose international relations
the United Kingdom is responsible: Channel Islands, Isle of Man, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Falkland
Islands and Dependencies, Fiji, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Pitcairn, St. Helena and
Dependencies, Seychelles, Turks and Caicos Islands. Also with a declaration that
the Government of the United Kingdom do not accept the reservations to articles IV,
VII, VIII, IX or XII of the Convention made by Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Bul-
garia, Burma, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
India, Mongolia, Morocco, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Spain, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Venezuela.)
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 78, p. 277; for subsequent actions, sec reference& in
Cumulative Indexes Nos. 1 to 8, as well as annex A in volumes 645, 646 and 656.

END
