Accessible document Please recycleThis record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation co
ncerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org).
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of
the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
25-24859 (E)
*2524859*
United Nations S/PV.10003
Security Council
Eightieth year
10003rd meeting
Tuesday, 23 September 2025, 1 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Cho/Mr. Sangjin Kim (Republic of Korea)
Members: Algeria Mr. Attaf
China Mr. Geng Shuang
Denmark Mr. Rasmussen
France Mr. Dharmadhikari
Greece Mr Gerapetritis
Guyana Mr Todd
Pakistan Mr. Dar
Panama Mr. Hoyos Boyd
Russian Federation Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone Mr. Kabba
Slovenia Ms. Fajon
Somalia Mr. Ali
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Ms Cooper
United States of America Mr. Waltz/Ms. Locetta
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
2/34 25-24859
The meeting was called to order at 1.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
presidents, prime ministers, ministers and other high-level representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores the importance
of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Egypt, Kuwait, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and
Türkiye to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance with
the provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice in this regard
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States; and Her Excellency Ms. Kaja
Kallas, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: We are confronting one of the darkest chapters of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Nearly two years after the horrific Hamas terror attacks
of 7 October 2023 and the devastating Israeli military response that followed, the
violence has only deepened across the occupied Palestinian territory, with grave
threats to regional and global peace and security.
The Israeli military onslaught in Gaza City is compounding an already
catastrophic humanitarian crisis. Countless Palestinian civilians and the remaining
hostages are trapped under relentless bombardment and deprived of food, water,
electricity and medicine. Famine is a reality, with the population constantly forced
to move and being starved. To call this situation untenable and morally and legally
indefensible does not begin to capture the scale of human suffering.
I have repeatedly appealed for an immediate permanent ceasefire; the
immediate, unconditional release of all hostages; and immediate, unconditional and
unhindered humanitarian access. United Nations resolutions continue to be ignored
and international humanitarian law violated. Impunity prevails and our collective
credibility is being undermined.
The violence is spreading from Gaza into the occupied West Bank and beyond,
including several countries in the region and, recently, even Qatar. Efforts to secure
a ceasefire and hostage release deal, led by Qatar, Egypt and the United States of
America, suffered a serious blow on 9 September. The Israeli attack was not only a
violation of Qatar’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. It also threatened the very
norms and mechanisms we rely on for diplomacy and conflict resolution.
The viability of a two-State solution is steadily eroding, now reaching its
most critical level in more than a generation. Relentless settlement expansion, de
facto annexation, forced displacement and cycles of deadly violence, including by

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 3/34
extremist settlers, have entrenched an unlawful Israeli occupation and pushed us
perilously close to a point of no return.
Israel’s recent approval of settlement construction in the E1 area is especially
alarming. If implemented, it would sever the occupied West Bank, destroying the
territorial contiguity of a Palestinian State. Israeli settlements are not just a political
issue. They are a flagrant violation of international law.
At the same time, the Palestinian Authority is facing an existential crisis. Fiscal,
political and institutional pressures are undermining its ability to function. Israel’s
withholding of clearance revenues, the suffocation of the Palestinian economy and a
sharp decline in donor aid have left the Palestinian Authority unable to pay salaries
or deliver basic services. Urgent international support, financial and political, is
needed to stabilize the Palestinian Authority and preserve its viability as a partner
for peace
And yet, amid the darkness, a glimmer of hope emerged yesterday with the
resumption of the High-level International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement
of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution. I
commend France and Saudi Arabia for co-chairing this important meeting and for
helping to reignite political momentum. I welcome the recognition of Palestinian
statehood by many more countries, including permanent Council members France
and the United Kingdom. This is the clearest path to a two-State solution: Israel
and an independent, sovereign, democratic, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security, on the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States, based on international law and United Nations resolutions.
We must seize this momentum. The so-called “day after” in Gaza must be anchored
in international law, reject any form of ethnic cleansing and have a clear political
horizon towards a viable two-State solution.
As I said to the General Assembly this morning (see A/80/PV.4), we must urgently
reverse the dangerous trends on the ground. Relentless settler expansion and violence
and the looming threat of annexation must stop. The calls of the International Court
of Justice must be heeded, including for Israel to immediately cease settlement
activities and end its unlawful presence in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The
illegal occupation must end. And we must support Palestinian institutions politically
and financially to carry out essential reforms and ensure fiscal stability.
(spoke in French)
A just and lasting peace will never be built through more violence. Peace
demands a collective commitment to diplomacy, to international law and to the
dignity of all people. There are actions that the Security Council must take. There
are responsibilities that each Council member must uphold. We cannot let this fragile
moment slip away.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. It is yet another stark reminder
that the situation in Gaza stands as one of the greatest challenges to international
peace and security. The immense scale of human suffering and the implications for
regional stability demand our urgent and united attention. This is not an abstract
challenge; it is measured in lives lost every day. Nearly two years have passed
since Hamas’ terrorist attacks on 7 October 2023. In that time, more than 64,000
people have been killed. The humanitarian crisis worsens each day, with people in
Gaza — particularly women, children and other vulnerable groups — facing constant
threats to their lives and safety. Equally troubling is the famine now unfolding in

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
4/34 25-24859
Gaza. According to the recent Integrated Food Security Phase Classification report,
more than half a million people are already facing famine. The crisis is projected
to spread to Dayr al-Balah and Khan Yunis in the coming weeks. We must prevent
any further devastation for civilians already in desperate conditions. Safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access must be guaranteed without any further delay.
We call for the immediate lifting of all restrictions on the entry and distribution of
humanitarian assistance.
The Republic of Korea is deeply alarmed by Israel’s ground operation to seize
control of Gaza City, which risks further exacerbating an already catastrophic
humanitarian crisis. We are also gravely concerned that its decision to resume
construction in the E1 settlement area would threaten to isolate Palestinian
communities in the area. Given the dire situation, upholding international law,
and in particular international humanitarian law, is imperative. These rules are not
aspirational ideals, but binding obligations designed to safeguard human dignity
even in the darkest moments of conflict. We urge all parties to comply fully with
these principles
In this difficult context, the Republic of Korea remains gravely concerned about
Israel’s recent attack in Qatari territory. This act is unacceptable. It not only violates
the territorial sovereignty of the State of Qatar, one of the key mediating countries,
but also jeopardizes ongoing negotiations to achieve an immediate ceasefire and
secure the release of all hostages held by Hamas.
We reaffirm our full support for the tireless mediation efforts of the United States,
Qatar and Egypt. We commend the unwavering commitment of Qatar’s diplomatic
mediation, which remains indispensable to ending the cycle of violence and creating
a pathway towards stability. The Republic of Korea also reiterates its steadfast call
for an immediate ceasefire and the unconditional release of all hostages. Securing
their freedom, together with establishing a permanent and fully respected ceasefire,
are indispensable steps towards a just and lasting peace.
The Republic of Korea deeply understands the Palestinian people’s aspirations
to establish their own State. We believe that the two-State solution is the only viable
pathway to resolve the Israel-Palestine issue and to build lasting peace. The Korean
Government will continue to play its due role in the international community’s
growing efforts to build peace and stability in the region based on the two-State
solution. Taking all considerations into account, Korea is committed to recognizing
Palestinian statehood at a time when it would be genuinely conducive to realizing
the two-State solution.
As we deliberate today, let us not lose sight of our common goal: a Middle East
where peoples of all walks of life can coexist in peace, security and prosperity. Korea
stands ready to contribute to alleviating civilian suffering, upholding the principles
of international law and helping to lay the firm foundations of a just and enduring
peace for all
I resume my functions as the President of the Council.
I now call on His Excellency, Mr. Mohammad Ishaq Dar, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Mr. Dar (Pakistan): At the outset I wish to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I welcome the participation of all the
Ministers joining this important discussion today. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his valuable briefing and thoughtful remarks. The Secretary-General’s voice has
always been one of wisdom and compassion, in Palestine and beyond, to promote
peace and alleviate human sufferings. We salute this dedication and devotion.

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 5/34
We meet today in the shadow of a profound and deeply troubling tragedy. The
Palestinian people are enduring unimaginable suffering, an unbearable daily toll
of human lives, the destruction of homes and neighbourhoods and the obliteration
of essential infrastructure. Hospitals, schools and markets lie in ruins. Roads and
utilities have been shattered. The very fabric of society has been torn apart. More
than 64,000 lives have been lost, and more than 100,000 people have been injured.
These are not mere statistics. There are grieving mothers, anguished fathers, suffering
children and revered elders. The devastation is immense. The grief is immeasurable.
The world must not remain silent.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza has reached catastrophic proportions.
Starvation grips the population, and famine has taken hold. According to the most
recent Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis, famine is now a
reality in Gaza City, putting more than half a million people at grave risk. In Khan
Yunis and Dayr al-Balah, famine looms imminently, threatening countless more
lives. The ongoing military operations in Gaza City inflict a relentless toll. Dozens
of Palestinians are killed each day, entire families are displaced and communities
torn apart. Already, 300,000 people have been uprooted, and nearly 1 million face
imminent displacement. The roar of fighter jets, the plumes of smoke from tank fire
and the collapse of buildings — what must this relentless violence mean for women,
children and the most vulnerable? And what of the hostages caught in the crossfire,
whose lives hang in the balance?
In the West Bank, illegal settlement expansion continues unabated. The latest
E1 plan is a grave violation of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions and a stark manifestation of settler colonialism in the twenty-first
century — a blow to the two-State solution.
The time for action is upon us. Pakistan calls for the following urgent and
concrete measures: first, an immediate, unconditional and permanent ceasefire
to halt the bloodshed and prevent further loss of lives; secondly, full, unhindered
humanitarian access to Gaza and the immediate lifting of the blockade to allow
life-saving aid to reach those who are in need; and thirdly, a categorical end to
any forced displacement of Palestinians from their lands, while upholding the right
of return for refugees, in accordance with international law, and establishing an
international protection mechanism.
Pakistan reaffirms its unwavering support for the Palestinian people in their just
struggle for dignity, justice and self-determination through the establishment of a
sovereign, independent and contiguous Palestinian State, based on pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital.
Pakistan welcomed the High-level International Conference for the Peaceful
Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State
Solution, chaired by France and Saudi Arabia. We also commend the recent
recognition of the State of Palestine by numerous Member States — a step that
reflects adherence to justice and the principle of international law. Pakistan had the
honour of being among the first few countries to recognize the State of Palestine
following the Declaration of Independence in 1988. This positive momentum must
be sustained with resolute determination, seriousness of purpose and an unwavering
commitment to achieving a just and lasting solution.
The people of Palestine are facing a crisis of historic proportions. Their
suffering is a stain on our collective conscience. Gaza has become a graveyard for
humanity and for the global conscience. We call upon the Security Council and the
broader international community to act decisively, uphold human dignity, ensure
accountability and deliver justice. The time for words has passed. The time for action
is now.

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
6/34 25-24859
The President: I now call on Her Excellency Ms. Tanja Fajon, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia.
Ms. Fajon (Slovenia): I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and his
personal commitment to this issue.
Upon joining the Security Council, Slovenia felt the heavy weight of responsibility
of the Council to uphold international peace and security — a weight that translates to
upholding international law and rejecting double standards, choosing global benefit
over national interests and being ready for difficult conversations with partners
instead of silence. Every State that joins the Security Council or is a permanent
member of this body should know that membership entails a responsibility to act. It
does not matter whether a threat to peace and security is unfolding in Ukraine or in
Gaza. In both of these conflicts, international law is blatantly disregarded, and red
lines are persistently crossed.
This year, we have again witnessed immense numbers of deaths amongst
civilians in armed conflicts, many of them women and children, and lives shattered
by starvation and displacement. Let us recall that we have built a system that should
prevent atrocities, and we promised “never again”. Yet, what we saw this year was a
Security Council paralyzed by disrespect for the Council’s resolutions and disregard
for the decisions of international courts
We should stand up to this. When politicians facing charges for war crimes and
crimes against humanity are walking free while judges are put under sanctions, we
cannot afford to remain silent without becoming complicit. Let me be clear: when
all the rules and obligations of the international system we had constructed fail, this
itself is a threat to international peace and security.
Gaza has become a textbook example of the failure of the international
community. It has become a place in which people dread nightfall and fear what a new
day will bring. Gaza has become the deadliest place for children, the deadliest place
for humanitarian and medical workers and the deadliest place for journalists, the
place of the first-ever proclaimed famine in the Middle East. Marked by continuous
offensives and strikes against hospitals, schools, homes, shelters and holy places,
it is defined by death and despair, where hostages suffer and civilians count the
heartbeats they have left. Gaza is a human-made catastrophe, which is live-streamed
across the globe and sustained by those acting in contradiction to everything we
stand for
The existence of “reasonable grounds to conclude” or findings that acts “may
amount to” genocide are a threat to international peace and security. We commend
the work of the judicial and investigative mechanisms — the International Court
of Justice, the International Criminal Court and the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and Israel, particularly for its latest report — for sounding the alarm. It
is not on us to question their findings; it is on us to act on them. The demands of a
large majority of the international community are not performative diplomacy. The
calls for a ceasefire, the irreversible political steps and even the simple expressions
of solidarity are not stage-managed acts; they paint a dark picture of an international
community in despair, which understands that “never again” has become an
unfulfilled promise.
The two-State solution is equally in need of concrete and irreversible action.
I welcome the new wave of countries recognizing the State of Palestine, and I call
on others to take bold steps to recognize Palestine and normalize ties with both
States. We must step up to prevent further disintegration of this vision and to counter
occupation, annexation, forced displacement, human rights violations, terrorism and
extremism. Slovenia firmly supports the role of the United Nations, including the

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 7/34
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in
addressing the ongoing crisis and in paving the way to a two-State solution and to the
Palestinian Authority’s carrying out reform and assuming full political ownership in
the State of Palestine.
I appeal to all of us to not let the future of the Israeli people be defined by
terrorism and violence and to not let the future of the Palestinian people be defined by
occupation and perpetual human rights violations. And I appeal to Council members:
do not let our collective future be defined by the stain of the Gaza genocide; act now.
There is no bigger threat to international peace and security than a cycle of
violence perpetrated through continuous fear, everlasting hate and an uncertain
future. The stories of children starved to death, the threats to a displaced population
and a territory in fear should be all that we need to understand that the time for an
immediate, permanent and unconditional ceasefire is now.
The President: I now call on His Excellency, Mr. Ahmed Attaf, Minister of
State and Minister of Foreign Affairs, National Community Abroad and African
Affairs of Algeria.
Mr. Attaf (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting at the request of the group of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
members of the Security Council. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his valuable and comprehensive briefing on recent developments
in the Middle East
The region has become synonymous with destruction and devastation, with
injustice and oppression and with criminality in their most egregious forms and
manifestations. How could it be otherwise when this region, unlike any other, has been
enduring all these horrors for decades. Far from any exaggeration, one-upmanship,
qualification or dramatization, the situation speaks for itself, be it on the question of
Palestine in particular or the regional landscape in the Middle East in general.
When it comes to the Palestinian situation, we can no longer deny that, for more
than two years, we have been witnessing a full-fledged genocidal war in Gaza.
That was confirmed by the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel. There is
no longer any room for debate about the threat of famine in Gaza, after the United
Nations confirmed and officially declared it. There is no longer any room for
interpretation regarding plans for displacement, reoccupation and annexation of
Gaza and the West Bank after the Israeli occupation began to blatantly and brazenly
implement and activate them.
As to the wider region, the scope of the Israeli aggression is vast. There was an
Israeli aggression against Yemen, then an Israeli aggression against Lebanon, then
an Israeli aggression against Syria, then an Israeli aggression against Iran, and, just
a few days ago, an Israeli aggression against the State of Qatar. Needless to say, this
list is likely to continue and expand in the wake of the threats that have affected, and
continue to affect, other countries in the region. Such is the unjust and tragic reality
that the Israeli occupation is seeking to perpetuate, as it forges ahead launching one
front of aggression after another. Now that the Israeli occupation itself is touting its
achievements, the Council no longer needs to solve the puzzles.
First, the Israeli occupation is seeking to destroy any prospect of establishing
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State, not only on the ground, but also in
hearts and minds, if it can.
Secondly, the Israeli occupation is seeking to redraw the borders of the region
according to its whims and delusions, based on one of its most dangerous myths — that
of a “Greater Israel”.

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
8/34 25-24859
Thirdly and lastly, the Israeli occupation is seeking to cement its absolute
hegemony over the region and establish itself as the sole authority there, attacking
whomever it wants, whenever it wants and however it wants. It cares not one bit about
international law, the Charter of the United Nations or even the most fundamental
rules and norms of civilized and peaceful coexistence.
How is it that in addition to all of this, the Israeli occupation dares to promote
its falsehood that the Palestinians want them out, while it is denying them their
right to exist, their right to life and their right to establish their own independent
and sovereign State? How is it that on top of all this, the Israeli occupation dares
to disseminate its false propaganda that it is alone, surrounded by enemies who are
seeking to destroy it, when, in fact, no country in the region has been spared from
its oppression and tyranny? How is it that, after all of this, the Israeli occupation
portrays itself as a bastion of democracy and the rule of law in the region, even
though it has proven to the whole world that it represents the greatest threat to justice
and the law, the most serious threat to the security and stability of the region and the
gravest threat to international peace and security?
The tragedies and horrors that the Middle East region is now confronting demand
that we comprehensively and duly rethink the question of peace and security in a
way that does not countenance fragmentation or division. The issue of security in
the Middle East did not begin with the events of 7 October 2023, and it is therefore
unfair, biased and reductive to trace it back to that date. The history of the region
spans the history of this Organization of ours and confirms that the Palestinian cause
remains the central issue that cannot be blotted out, neutralized or concealed. Today
we see with our own eyes how attempts to undermine this cause have only increased
its legality and legitimacy as the most just cause on the face of the planet.
The history of the region is engraved in the resolutions of the Council, which
affirms that there is no alternative to the two-State solution and the establishment
of a Palestinian State on the 1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, as
a just, permanent and definitive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Today
we see with our own eyes how the plans to eliminate this State have only bolstered
the momentum of its diplomatic recognition, which Algeria welcomes and calls
for strengthening by enabling the Palestinian State to become a full Member of
our Organization.
The history of the region is rooted in international legitimacy and confirms that
putting a end, once and for all, to the unjust and exceptional regime of unaccountability
and impunity enjoyed by the Israeli occupation is inevitable. Today we also see with
our own eyes how the majority of Member States are convinced of the need to deter
and punish those who consider themselves alone to be above all the systems, norms,
precepts and laws that others abide by.
Moreover, the history of the region confirms that security and stability in the
Middle East will not be achieved unless our Council shoulders the responsibilities
entrusted to it. The fate of the Palestinian cause, the fate of the Palestinian people and
the fate of all the countries and peoples of the region all remain at the mercy of the
Council’s will and ability to enforce its resolutions, uphold international legitimacy
and deter all breaches, violations and abuses to which it is currently being subjected
unchecked, uncontrollably and with impunity.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Musa Timothy Kabba, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I thank His Excellency Mr. Cho Hyun, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, for convening this meeting at the request
of Algeria, Guyana, Somalia, Pakistan and Sierra Leone. I also thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. António Guterres, for his important briefing. My delegation commends

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 9/34
the principled leadership of the Secretary-General and the work of the United Nations
teams in the field.
The overall situation in the Middle East remains fragile and evolving. However,
while some areas, such as Lebanon and Syria, are experiencing significantly less
violence than before, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, in contrast, are in very
dire circumstances, with civilians enduring more than 23 months of unimaginable
and increasing violence. We recall the attack by Hamas and other armed groups on
7 October 2023, which led to the killing of Israeli civilians and the taking of hostages
from among them, and we reiterate our unequivocal condemnation of that heinous
action, especially the taking of hostages. Sierra Leone further recalls that, since the
start of this conflict, the Council has remained seized of this subject, having received
extensive briefings on the prevailing security, humanitarian and political situation
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. We regret that efforts by the Council and the
mediators to secure a deal that allows for the cessation of hostilities have been met
with challenges. In this regard, we have concluded, along with other Member States,
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be resolved only by peaceful means and that
the military option is not viable.
The atrocities committed on and since the attacks of 7 October 2023 highlight
the urgency of finding a comprehensive and lasting solution to this long-standing
conflict. Sierra Leone remains dedicated to supporting international efforts towards a
political, just and comprehensive settlement that ends the occupation, stops settlement
expansion and addresses extremism and terrorism. Sierra Leone is gravely concerned
that the continuation of this war deepens despair among the civilians in the Gaza
Strip and the hostages held by Hamas. With intensified hostilities, significant loss
of life, the destruction of critical civilian infrastructure, blockades and evacuation
orders, the civilians in the Gaza Strip, including women and children, have borne the
brunt of this war. The current status quo is unacceptable, as it is unbearable for the
civilians with no apparent hope of survival. This is a blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, the provisions of international humanitarian law and Security
Council resolutions
Guided by the United Nations Charter, international law and the rule of law, we
emphasize the following key points.
First, there must be a complete cessation of hostilities in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank and an irreversible political process leading to a permanent ceasefire.
The parties to the conflict must recommit to ongoing peace efforts and take concrete
steps that will prevent further atrocities. We acknowledge and commend the efforts
of the mediators — Egypt, Qatar and the United States — to achieve this end.
Secondly, the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages, including
Israeli civilians held by Hamas, and Palestinian detainees held without due process
is imperative, as are the immediate and unconditional lifting of aid restrictions and
the restoration of full and unhindered humanitarian access. We emphasize the role of
the United Nations and its partners, including the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to achieve this end
Thirdly, Sierra Leone reaffirms its unwavering support for the two-State
solution, based on the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 181 (II) of 1947, and consistent with Article 4, paragraph 1, of
the United Nations Charter. We welcome the endorsement by the General Assembly
of the New York Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine
and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution, and we reaffirm the legitimacy
of the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, including their right to an
independent and sovereign State over the entire occupied Palestinian territory, in
line with international law and the agreed parameters.

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
10/34 25-24859
Fourthly, Sierra Leone supports Israel’s right to exist in peace and security,
free from threats and attacks. Accordingly, we urge all armed groups to disarm
and renounce violence, paving the way for the demilitarization of the Palestinian
territory. Sustainable peace cannot take root while armed groups continue to operate
outside the law.
Fifthly, we deplore and reject any attempts to forcibly displace Palestinians from
their land. Palestinians temporarily evacuated must be allowed to return to their
homes at the earliest opportunity.
Finally, we emphasize the need for the Palestinian Authority to be fully
empowered and supported politically, financially and administratively, in order to
enable it to continue implementing its credible reform agenda.
As we celebrate the eightieth session of the General Assembly, let us reflect on
the principles on which this very institution was built. Among its core values is to
promote peace, justice and the dignity of all persons. We must exercise the political
will to deliver peace to the Palestinians and Israelis. Ongoing international efforts
are a positive step that must be fully leveraged by both parties in good faith. The time
to act is now in order to save the Palestinian people from the scourge of war.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Hugh Hilton Todd, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Guyana.
Mr. Todd (Guyana): As a member State of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, Guyana thanks you, Mr. President, for facilitating the group’s request
for convening today’s meeting. I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his remarks and for his consistent and principled advocacy on behalf of the
Palestinian people and for peace in the Middle East region.
The protracted Israeli aggression against Palestine cannot continue to be a
defining feature of politics in the Middle East. In recent times, the aggression has
extended to other countries in the region, heightening instability and insecurity,
driving Israel poles away from its neighbours and undermining good neighbourliness.
The ongoing war in Gaza has itself become a catalyst of pain and pressure — pain
for the hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who are the targets of Israeli instruments
of war: starvation, bombs, bullets, displacement, dispossession and other cruelties
solely intended to subjugate the Palestinian nation. We have seen, for example,
how famine unfolded in Gaza in full view of the international community, and
192 countries could not stop it. The war in Gaza has also become a catalyst for
pressure — political pressure — which seems to be the only way that the occupying
Power might respond to the international outcry against the genocidal acts being
perpetrated against Palestinians. Guyana calls on the States Members of the
United Nations to ensure that their engagements with the State of Israel do not in
any way contribute to prolonging the war in Gaza and the Israeli oppression of the
Palestinian people.
It took a collective effort to dismantle the system of apartheid in South Africa, and
Guyana firmly believes that an equally strong and organized international response
is needed to ensure the end of the occupation of the Palestinian territory. I must
underscore the importance of the recognition of the State of Palestine by all Member
States as a pivotal part of forcing an end to the Israeli occupation. Recognition lends
greater strength to international efforts to end the occupation and to achieve an
independent Palestine.
On the question of the occupation, allow me to recall that more than a year ago,
the International Court of Justice issued its advisory opinion confirming that Israel’s
prolonged occupation of the Palestinian territory is illegal under international law
and must be brought to an end (see A/78/968). The General Assembly later demanded

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 11/34
that Israel end its occupation within a year, that is, by 18 September 2025. That date
has now passed, without compliance on Israel’s part. On the contrary, we have instead
witnessed a series of developments that only entrenches the occupation further and
destroys the two-State solution. Guyana calls on Israel to respect the Charter of the
United Nations; to abide by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the
Security Council and other organs of the United Nations; to cease its contempt of
international law; and to commit to true peace in the Middle East.
The occupation of the Palestinian territory and the attendant ills represent a
historic tragedy of proportions that should shock the human conscience across the
globe. Sadly, however, what we are witnessing is an othering of the Palestinian
people that makes it difficult for some to see the Palestinian people as they see
their own people. We must all reject this othering and fight for the rights of the
Palestinian people as we would for the rights of our own people. The right-minded,
the peace-loving and the promoters of justice must continue to defend the Palestinian
people and oppose all attempts to erase them from their homeland.
I conclude by reaffirming Guyana’s continued commitment to the two-State
solution and by underscoring our conviction that the rule of law will ultimately prevail
in this decades-long question, as long as all Member States choose to be guided by
the principles of the Charter. I also reiterate the calls we have consistently made over
the past two years for a ceasefire in Gaza, for the release of all hostages held in Gaza
and Palestinian detainees held in Israeli prisons and for unimpeded humanitarian
access into Gaza. I also call on Israel to cease all its actions that are dismantling the
two-State solution and the possibility of peace in the Middle East region.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Lars Løkke Rasmussen,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark.
Mr. Rasmussen (Denmark): At the outset, I want to thank Mr. Cho Hyun,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea, for convening this meeting. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General for his very insightful briefing. Through
the chaos of this abhorrent war, he has consistently raised his voice and that of the
United Nations in support of peace. Denmark commends this kind of leadership, and
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the United Nations staff on the
ground for their tireless efforts and sacrifice
I am speaking today not only as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark,
and thereby a politician responsible to the people of Denmark, but also as a member
of the Security Council, responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and as a grandfather, responsible to my grandchildren, who I am totally
convinced will one day ask what I did, what we did in the face of such immense
suffering. I ask members today, how will we answer them? Will we say that we
stepped up and met the challenge of peace or that we idled in inaction and watched
helplessly as the horrors unfolded?
Nearly two years have passed since the war in Gaza began. It was unleashed by
the horrific terrorist attack by Hamas on 7 October 2023 — an attack that tore through
Israeli families, left parents without children and children without parents, a nation
wounded to its core and hostages and their families going through unimaginable
suffering. Denmark has condemned this attack in the strongest terms possible, and
we will continue to do so, just as we will continue to insist on the immediate and
safe release of every hostage. Denmark considers itself to be a long-standing friend
of the people of Israel. Israel has the right to defend itself against terrorism. This I
have always supported and this I will continue to support.
But friends also have to speak the truth to each other. Today, we must face
the fact that Israel’s war in Gaza has created a humanitarian catastrophe on an
unbearable scale. Israel must comply with international law, including international

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
12/34 25-24859
humanitarian law. The human suffering in Gaza must be brought to an end, and it
must happen now. Tens of thousands of civilians have already been killed, including
more than 18,000 children. This constitutes a classroom of children every day. It
constitutes a humanitarian and human failure on an unprecedented scale.
We are witnessing an ongoing expanded military operation in Gaza City.
Children are starving, with no access to clean water or medicine. Doctors are forced
to amputate without sedation. Mothers are powerless to feed their babies. A famine is
unfolding before our eyes, while the World Food Programme alone has enough food
to feed Gaza for months, waiting at the border.
This is also why Denmark, on behalf of the 10 elected members of the Security
Council, coordinated a draft resolution (S/2025/583) for the Council only last week.
The draft resolution demanded a ceasefire; the release of all hostages; and that the
Government of Israel immediately lift all restrictions on the entry of humanitarian
aid into Gaza, in line with international humanitarian law. These are demands that
the international community has reiterated on multiple occasions, including just
yesterday in the General Assembly. I deeply regret that the draft resolution did not
receive the support of all 15 Council members. But today, I restate these demands.
Israel must change its course, immediately. The war in Gaza must end. The Security
Council, as the body responsible for international peace and security, should be able
to make these demands. Indeed, this should be the bare minimum that we can do. But
around this table, that means all of us, every single member, working in concert and
common cause towards this goal. It means setting aside political differences to save
lives. Last week, 14 members of the Council were willing to do this. We hope that
this can soon become all 15.
In regard to our American friends, just this morning President Trump said
that we have to stop the war in Gaza, immediately. He said we have to negotiate,
immediately, for peace. Denmark continues to support the dedicated efforts of the
United States, Qatar and Egypt to mediate a ceasefire. The unwavering commitment
of our American friends to find a path to peace is critical in this context. But we
count on them in the Council too. Their leadership is critical in our joint aspirations
of bringing peace and stability to the region.
Denmark has consistently contributed to ease the suffering through humanitarian
contributions. Together with 24 other countries and the European Union, we have
called on Israel to resume medical evacuations from Gaza to the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and we stand ready to support the treatment of those patients.
Two weeks ago, I visited the region, which I have done several times since
7 October 2023. I have met with Israeli families of hostages. Their pain is real.
Their demand must be immediately and unconditionally answered. I also met with
Palestinians in the West Bank who face checkpoints, settlements, settler violence,
property destruction and land grabs. Their pain is real as well. Their longing for
freedom and dignity is evident.
The two-State solution remains the only solution to lasting peace for two peoples,
both deserving of security, both deserving of dignity. This was confirmed during the
High-level International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of
Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution, yesterday.
It is clear that the momentum is growing and that we are witnessing a renewed
energy and enthusiasm for peace, based on the two-State solution, a solution that
Denmark is prepared to build on. This is why I said yesterday, and I repeat today, that
the keys to recognition of a Palestinian State should no longer lie in the hands of the
Israeli Government. The Palestinians themselves must become masters of their own
destiny. The time for the end to this decades-long struggle is now. The only path to
lasting peace is the two-State solution, for both Palestinians and Israelis.

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 13/34
The President: I now call on Her Excellency Ms. Yvette Cooper MP, Secretary of
State for Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Affairs of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Ms. Cooper (United Kingdom): I thank the Secretary-General for the briefing at
the beginning of this crucial meeting.
Yesterday, alongside other Ministers here in New York this week, I hosted a
session to hear from doctors who have recently returned from Gaza. The stories they
told will stay with me forever. One told of the screams of toddlers and the scream of a
toddler on whom she had operated without full anaesthetics, and how she hoped and
prayed that he would not feel pain. Another told of the seriously malnourished pregnant
women, affecting their babies. They talked about doctors and nurses whose family
members were killed, but who still came back to work in hospitals, in unimaginable
conditions, to help others. They told of how the absolute basics of modern medicine,
such as antibiotics and anaesthetics, things that we around this Council table take for
granted for ourselves and our loved ones, were unavailable, blocked and denied. We
say the words humanitarian crisis, but this is what it means: the pain and the screams
of toddlers who cannot get the basic healthcare that they need.
Only 18 out of 36 hospitals in Gaza now remain open, all of them struggling to
operate amid severe shortages of fuel, medicine, equipment and staff. More than 1,700
healthcare workers have been killed in Gaza and more than 300 have been detained.
This is what the catastrophic collapse of Gaza’s healthcare system looks like.
As we are gathered here, Israeli forces are escalating the conflict in Gaza City,
pounding more homes into rubble, sending frightened families scattering. It is
incomprehensible. It is inhumane. It is utterly unjustifiable. And it must end. All that
this action by the Israeli Government will do is make a catastrophic humanitarian
situation worse, with more healthcare in crisis. It will make it harder than ever
to get desperately needed aid to those who need it, with more innocent children
enduring a human-made famine and with more civilians killed. However, it will
make it harder to get the remaining hostages out, who were seized by Hamas in the
barbaric terrorist attack of 7 October 2023 and who are still being held in the most
horrendous conditions, prolonging the anguish for their families. And I reiterate our
condemnation of Hamas and that barbaric terrorism on 7 October 2023.
I met with some of the United Kingdom-linked hostage families again last
week. Their ask of all of us is to keep the hostages at the forefront of our minds, to
do everything we can, to give their loved ones the chance of coming home and to
achieve a ceasefire that gives them the chance to do that. That must be our task. We
know what needs to be done. We need a ceasefire now. We need the release of all the
hostages. We need the immediate restoration of aid and support for medical care, and
we need a broader framework for the lasting peace, and I welcome and support the
mediation efforts being made by the United States, Qatar and Egypt to seek an end
to conflict and to seek peace.
We know too that Gaza cannot be seen in isolation from the West Bank. The
Israeli Government is tightening its stranglehold on the Palestinian economy and
continuing to approve illegal settlement construction, including just recently in the
E1 area of East Jerusalem, which is a further blow to the viability of the two-State
solution. We urge Israel to reverse these plans.
After two years of bloodshed, I believe the world is united in wanting this awful
war to end; united in wanting all the hostages released; united in rejection of any role
for Hamas in the future of Gaza or the future of a Palestinian State; united in wanting
Israel to unblock aid and end the humanitarian catastrophe; and united in wanting
a better and more peaceful future for the region, with the reconstruction of Gaza,

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
14/34 25-24859
dignity for its people and a new era of relations to support their collective security.
That future must be based on a two-State solution.
The United Kingdom’s historic recognition of the State of Palestine this week
is part of our commitment to peace, part of acting to protect the viability of the
two-State solution as the only path to a just and lasting peace and to security for
Palestinians and Israelis alike; part of rejecting extremist ideas on all sides, which,
too often, involve fantasies of the destruction of the State of Israel or the expulsion
of the Palestinian population, both of which we reject; and part of our wider effort to
work with partners on a long-term peace, not just to halt the immediate crisis but also
to advance a pragmatic plan for what comes next. None of this can happen without
an immediate ceasefire, and that is where all of this has to start.
Yesterday, one of the doctors described the impact on children of growing up in
trauma and devastation, and those will be the consequences for generations to come
if we do not act now. We owe it to all of those children growing up in Gaza, across
Palestine and across Israel. We owe it to all of them to build a better future. The time
for peace is now.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Georgios Gerapetritis, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Hellenic Republic.
Mr. Gerapetritis (Greece): I would like to thank you, personally, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting today, at a very critical moment for the
Middle East
Words fail to describe what we have been witnessing in the Gaza Strip. The
humanitarian catastrophe is ongoing. For almost two years, the civilian population
has endured conditions that are unsustainable and deeply concerning. No one should
be compelled to live under such circumstances. The expansion of military operations
in the city of Gaza has led to further displacement and risks worsening an already
dire humanitarian crisis. This reality is endangering civilian lives. Any further
escalation in Gaza that worsens the already dramatic situation for civilians must
be avoided. The plight of children underscores the urgent need to guarantee safe,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access at scale to all parts of Gaza, in full
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law.
Greece is actively engaged in all efforts to alleviate the suffering of the people
in Gaza. We have consistently provided humanitarian assistance. We have welcomed
injured children from Gaza for treatment in Greek hospitals. In another strand of
effort, we voted in favour of every draft resolution that would address the crisis in
Gaza, the latest of which demanded the lifting of all restrictions on humanitarian
aid (S/2025/583). And, in May, I stood alongside the representatives of 80 United
Nations Member States here, in New York, reaffirming the significance of protecting
civilians in armed conflicts.
Humanitarian access is crucial to alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian
population. Safe access to food, water, shelter, clothing and medicines throughout
the territory must be guaranteed, and international humanitarian law must be
respected. Initiatives to expand deliveries in Gaza by land, air and sea must be
further strengthened. At the same time, the hostages are continuing to suffer horribly
at the hands of Hamas. We were appalled by the images and videos released last
month, showing two hostages, visibly emaciated, as they described the appalling
conditions of their captivity. We reiterate our call for the unconditional release of all
the remaining hostages.
We recall that the Council rightly addressed the recent strikes in Doha earlier
this month (see S/PV.9992), which are even more concerning given Qatar’s crucial
role in hosting and mediating, alongside the United States and Egypt, negotiations

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 15/34
for a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas. We continue to believe that diplomacy
remains the most effective tool, even in the most difficult circumstances. Greece has
unwaveringly supported the negotiation efforts and will continue to do so. And we
urge all parties to rise to the gravity of the situation, to return to the negotiating table
as soon as possible and to be guided by international law.
Recent settlement expansion in the West Bank and settler violence are further
impairing the prospects for peace. We express our profound concern at announcements
about the construction of additional settlements in the E1 area of the West Bank.
Such plans, were they to be realized, would further undermine the prospects of a
two-State solution. The escalation of settler violence, including against Christian
communities, is also a cause for grave alarm. It needs to stop now.
However remote or difficult the prospect may seem today, the two-State solution
remains the only viable path forward. We need to provide the Palestinian people
with a credible prospect of hope for the future. This is an indispensable condition
for peace, stability and security in the region, including for the long-term security of
Israel. We appreciate, in this vein, the leadership demonstrated by France and Saudi
Arabia in co-chairing the High-Level International Conference for the Peaceful
Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-State
Solution. We stand in support of all international initiatives, including the relevant
plan by the Global Alliance for the Implementation of the Two-State Solution and
Arab States towards realizing this vision. We will continue to contribute to every
effort that revives the political process towards a two-State solution — a political
process, which, we firmly believe, must lead to the establishment of a sovereign
Palestinian State through a revitalized and comprehensive approach and which is
essential for lasting peace and stability in the region.
Against this backdrop, we see no role for Hamas — neither in governance,
nor in future discussions concerning the day after in Gaza. Therefore, Greece has
repeatedly stressed that an empowered and reformed Palestinian Authority must play
a central role in Gaza’s future and remains the best partner for peace. The European
Union has already stepped up, approving a three-year package worth approximately
€1.6 billion, which is crucial to preventing fiscal collapse and enabling the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its task.
To Greece the stability of the Middle East is not an abstract concern; it is an
indispensable necessity. As a country of the Eastern Mediterranean, at the crossroads
of Europe, Asia and Africa, developments in the region have a direct impact on our
own security, prosperity and stability and on Europe as a whole. We are convinced
that only through dialogue and the rule of international law can we build a safer
neighbourhood — one in which peoples can coexist in dignity and security.
Mr. Hoyos Boyd (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Panama welcomes the convening
of this briefing at the request of the delegations of Algeria, Guyana, Pakistan, Sierra
Leone and Somalia. We also thank His Excellency Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing, which underscored the Council’s obligation under the
Charter of the United Nations to respond with unity and in responsible fashion to the
magnitude of the catastrophic situation in the Palestinian territories.
For more than seven decades, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been marked
by a lack of political will to resolve its root causes, breeding mistrust, extremism
and violence. The consequences of this lack of political will were laid bare in brutal
fashion on 7 October 2023, with the atrocious attacks by Hamas, which, once again, we
roundly condemn and which claimed more than 1,200 lives and entailed the abduction
of 251 persons, 20 of whom are believed to be still alive, suffering in the darkness
of the tunnels, deprived of the support of their families and the most basic dignity.
That episode triggered a spiral of violence that led to a war unprecedented in its level

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
16/34 25-24859
of devastation in the Gaza Strip. More than 65,000 Palestinians, including 18,000
children, have lost their lives, tens of thousands have been injured; millions have
been forcibly displaced from one place to another over and over again and entire
communities have been reduced to rubble, leaving an indelible mark of suffering on
thousands of families.
During the 59-day ceasefire between January and March, it was possible to halt
human suffering, facilitate humanitarian assistance in Gaza and make progress on
releasing hostages. Since its collapse, the catastrophic humanitarian situation has
worsened day by day — more than 14,000 Palestinians have lost their lives, and tens
of thousands have been injured. The hostages and their families continue to pay an
unbearable price, trapped in uncertainty and suffering.
As if violence were not enough, hunger is also claiming lives every day. The
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification has declared famine in Gaza. More
than 425 people, including 125 children, have died of starvation, not because of lack
of food but because of barriers to its entry and distribution. This tragedy has been
worsened by the development of the military operation on Gaza City, still inhabited
by hundreds of thousands of people, which has become the scene of intense bombing
and ground operations that have led to further mass displacement and dozens of
deaths, including among children.
The devastation is also affecting essential services: damaged hospitals and health
centres, collapsed water and sanitation networks and extreme precariousness for those
trying to save lives or tell the truth. Humanitarian workers and journalists, hundreds
of whom have been victims of violence, nevertheless continue to carry out their work
in untenable conditions and under constant threat. No objective can justify means
that violate international law or the protection of human life. For that reason, Panama
once again calls for an immediate and sustained ceasefire, the immediate, dignified
and unconditional release of all hostages and safe, sufficient and unhindered access
of vital humanitarian aid to Gaza. These are the basic conditions of humanity that
cannot be put off any longer.
The crisis is not limited to Gaza. In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
violence has reached alarming levels. Territorial fragmentation, insecurity and the
lack of prospects undermine the chances of any peaceful and sustainable political
solution. So far this year alone, more than 186 Palestinians and 16 Israelis have
lost their lives in incidents caused by the intensification of the conflict. There are
also hundreds of injured people and thousands affected by restrictions that condition
their daily lives. Military operations and mass arrests have displaced entire families,
including children and the elderly, while further closures and obstacles threaten
to isolate communities and cut off access to schools, hospitals and workplaces,
further exacerbating an already untenable situation. On top of this, the recent
unjustifiable violation of the territory of Qatar — an act that Panama also strongly
condemned — reiterates the need to bring an end to the conflict in view of great
concerns about escalation.
Panama reiterates that there is no military solution to this conflict. The only
solution is a serious, comprehensive and sustained political process, based on
international law and the relevant resolutions of the Council, allowing Israelis and
Palestinians to live in security and dignity, with internationally recognized borders,
guaranteed rights and with verifiable guarantees for both. That is the only possible
way to bring an end to decades of suffering and make room for reconciliation.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Abdisalan Abdi Ali, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
Mr. Ali (Somalia): At the outset, I would like to thank the Korean presidency
for convening this meeting based on the request from the Organization of Islamic

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 17/34
Cooperation members of the Security Council. I would like to welcome all the
ministers participating in this meeting today. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We remain gravely concerned about the continued escalation of the Israeli
military operations in Gaza. As we speak, these military operations are expanding
rapidly, and for the 2 million people still trapped in Gaza, it is a death sentence,
literally and figuratively. Since this war began, over 65,000 Palestinians have
been killed, the majority of them women and children. Last month’s report of the
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification has removed all doubts about what is
happening in Gaza. Famine is no longer looming; it is taking place now, before our
eyes. The death of children from hunger and disease is not a forecast; it is a daily
reality. Let us be absolutely clear: this is a human-made disaster, created through the
siege, blockade and systematic obstruction of humanitarian aid. The starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare is prohibited, and the use of hunger as a collective
punishment is a grave violation of international law. We must act with moral clarity.
The International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion (see A/78/968) unequivocally
reaffirmed the legal obligations of all States regarding the occupied Palestinian
territory. These obligations are binding, and they must be enforced. The blatant
disregard for these binding decisions, including the provisional measures issued in
January and March, is a direct challenge to the international legal order.
In that regard, I would like to make the following points.
First, we reiterate our call for an immediate, unconditional and permanent
ceasefire. It is clear that there is no military solution to this conflict. Somalia
recognizes and supports the ongoing ceasefire efforts led by Qatar, the United States
and Egypt and commends their unwavering commitment. The Israeli air strikes
on residential areas in Doha, the capital of Qatar, on 9 September mark a grave
and perilous escalation. It is appalling that this military air strike unfolded when
negotiators were engaged in talks over a United States-backed ceasefire proposal.
We stress that mediators must not be targeted and should be protected to ensure that
a pathway to peace remains viable.
Secondly, my delegation calls for the immediate and full restoration of
humanitarian access for all United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, throughout Gaza.
Israel, as the occupying Power, bears the legal responsibility under international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. Somalia reiterates its
call for the immediate release of all arbitrary detainees to allow them to return to
their families and loved ones.
Thirdly, we must revive a credible political track towards the recognition of the
State of Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations and stress the importance of
the unification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single Palestinian Authority. We
call for international support for reconstruction and development in the Palestinian
territories, including Gaza.
There is no doubt that addressing the root causes of the conflict begins with
the end of the occupation and the establishment of a sovereign, independent State
of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions
In that regard, we welcome the resumption of the High-level International
Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the
Implementation of the Two-State Solution, co-chaired by France and Saudi Arabia.
We commend the States that have recognized the State of Palestine and urge
others to do so

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
18/34 25-24859
In conclusion, Somalia reaffirms its commitment to working with all partners
towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, in line with international law,
and advancing the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Dharmadhikari (France) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and his commitment to supporting the
two-State solution in favour of peace and security for Israel and Palestine.
Yesterday, from the rostrum of the General Assembly during the High-level
International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and
the Implementation of the Two-State Solution, the President of the French Republic
forcefully recalled what brings us together: the urgency of ending the war in Gaza
and giving peace a real chance. Today, in the Security Council, it is our collective
responsibility to translate that demand into concrete action.
France unequivocally condemns the terrorist attacks of 7 October 2023. Nothing
can justify the use of terrorism. France also condemns the serious attacks on so
many innocent lives in Gaza. Hundreds of thousands of human beings there have
been plunged into hunger, fear and mourning. Lastly, France rejects the unacceptable
prospect of the forced displacement of the Gazan population. The extension of the
Israeli military offensive to Gaza City over the past week has only inflicted further
suffering on the people of Gaza. It is up to us to build a realistic alternative that is
line with our values and consistent with international law.
As famine continues to spread in the Gaza Strip, France is concerned that
the Council failed to reach agreement last Thursday to call for a response to the
humanitarian emergency.
France’s message is clear: all lives are of equal value, and all lives must
be protected.
The immediate and unconditional release of the hostages still being held by
Hamas is a priority. This demand must go hand in hand with a permanent ceasefire
in Gaza in order to end the suffering of the people of Gaza and allow for the safe,
large-scale and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid.
Yesterday the President of the French Republic announced France’s recognition
of the State of Palestine. This gesture reflects a deep conviction that the security of
Israel and justice for the Palestinians are inseparable. They can be guaranteed only
through the coexistence of two sovereign and democratic States living side by side
in peace and security, with Jerusalem as their capital.
This decision, shared by many other States, opens up a political path that we must
consolidate. This path is based on a road map, that of the New York Declaration, which
France, together with Saudi Arabia and many other partners, submitted and led the
General Assembly to adopt thanks to the support of 142 States (decision 80/506). This
road map is based on two essential phases.
The urgent first phase is aimed at securing the release of hostages, the cessation
of hostilities and large-scale humanitarian access. We call on all parties concerned
to resume negotiations as soon as possible and in good faith. In this regard, we
commend the tireless mediation efforts of Qatar, Egypt and the United States.
The second phase is that of stabilization and reconstruction. A transitional
administration excluding Hamas must be established in Gaza under the auspices
of the Palestinian Authority, with the support of the international community. It
must ensure security, undertake the effective disarmament of Hamas and address the
urgent needs of the population

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 19/34
France, together with its European partners, stands ready to contribute, including
by participating in an international stabilization mission to be decided by the Security
Council at the appropriate time.
This process also requires renewed and reformed Palestinian governance that
fully implements the commitments made. It requires Israel to make clear choices in
favour of negotiation and respect for international law.
The European Union, together with France, will make its future cooperation
conditional on these commitments.
The alternative is simple: either we preserve the possibility of two States and,
with that possibility, peace, or we allow a permanent conflict to take hold, with
disastrous consequences for the region and far beyond.
France calls on the Council to act with the determination and sense of
responsibility that it deserves. History will judge our ability to seize this moment.
Mr. Waltz (United States of America): I find it — and we find it — deeply
regrettable that Council members have opted to convene this high-level Security
Council briefing on Gaza on Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year, knowing full
well that that decision excludes Israel.
And frankly, it is a testament to how the Council has prioritized a lot of
performance over serious efforts to actually advance peace — serious efforts that
President Trump, Secretary Rubio, his team and partners such as Egypt and Qatar
are engaged in right now as we speak to end this horrific war. There have been more
than 80 Council meetings on this issue since 7 October 2023. The main outcome
of these meetings unfortunately has been to embolden Hamas, to undermine and
disrupt negotiations that are aimed at freeing all of the hostages and ending the war
and ending the suffering that we all want to end.
Unspoken today is the fact that, in the past two weeks alone, Israel has suffered
two terrorist attacks: in Jerusalem on 8 September and at the Allenby border crossing
on 18 September. We condemn these attacks, we offer condolences to the families
of those killed, and we call upon other countries to join us in a clear and explicit
condemnation of this violence by Hamas and its ideological allies.
Extremists like the terrorists who killed two Israel Defense Forces soldiers
on 18 September have shown their utter contempt for the people of Gaza. Hamas
has shown its utter contempt for the people of Gaza. They struck the very border
crossing through which nearly half of all aid delivered to Gaza between May and
September has passed. Let me say again: Hamas struck the border crossing through
which half of all aid through the better part of this year has passed. No country here
would willingly allow terrorists like this to threaten its people. Israel should not be
expected to be any different, and of course, has the right to defend itself from groups
that wish to do it harm.
As Secretary of State Rubio recently said, “As long as Hamas exists, there will
be no peace in the Middle East.” And every member here has seen evidence of how
Hamas has starved hostages and has tortured them. We have heard the testimony of
freed hostages on what they have endured, and sadly, some endure still, in captivity.
We the United States again demand that Hamas immediately release all 48 remaining
hostages and their remains, cease putting civilians in harm’s way, cease sacrificing
their own people for propaganda aims, disarm and surrender. This war could end
today if that happened. But Hamas refuses, while Israel has accepted the negotiators’
proposals. Rewarding Hamas’s refusal, whether with performative conferences or
one-sided Security Council resolutions, undermines and delays achieving the peace
we all want.

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
20/34 25-24859
Unfortunately, yesterday’s conference spoke to domestic audiences, but it will
prolong this tragic war in Gaza, and it will prolong the suffering. Hamas stands
emboldened today after that conference. We have rewarded its obstruction. We have
undermined efforts to achieve peace in both the short and the long term. Unilateral
recognition statements do not alter the reality on the ground — it does not alter the
fact that there is not a Palestinian State to recognize. And at this point there is no
credible Palestinian partner for peace.
The Palestinian Authority leaders from Ramallah are absent from New York this
week because they failed to meet their Oslo commitments. The commitments were
basic, including renouncing terrorism, renouncing violence and resolving issues
through direct negotiations with Israel. The Palestinian Authority has failed to clear
even those low bars. And I note its attempts to bypass negotiations through what
can only be called lawfare, including at the International Criminal Court and at the
International Court of Justice, and its pushes for unilateral recognition of statehood.
This charade is disappointing. It is clearly fuelled by domestic politics and has
given Hamas a reward for refusing to surrender, as well as an incentive. It is now
incentivized to keep holding the hostages in subhuman conditions.
We call on the Council membership and the United Nations to change its course,
to focus instead on to how to prevent Hamas from ever doing this again and on
how to eliminate it, to focus on how Hamas should free the hostages and create a
framework so that the people of Gaza can have a better future than the life they have
endured under terrorists
Secretary of State Rubio recently travelled to Israel and Qatar to address the
threat posed by Hamas, to advance the immediate return of all hostages and to ensure
humanitarian aid actually reaches civilians. And the United States will continue
working tirelessly towards those ends. And the Secretary was clear: the United
States supports a negotiated settlement that will lead to the release of every single
hostage. The President was clear today in his statement in the General Assembly to
that same end — we must lead to the elimination of Hamas, and we must end the war.
In the interim, the United States has worked to support the delivery of
humanitarian aid to civilians in Gaza, with actual meaningful results. The Gaza
Humanitarian Foundation has securely delivered more than 170 million meals directly
to civilians. We have also seen the increased flow of humanitarian aid, including
through United Nations entities. However, looting and diversion are undeniable and
remain serious problems that must be addressed. The Organization’s own data shows
that approximately 85 per cent of United Nations aid sent to Gaza since 19 May has
been looted.
The fighting must end so that the international community can concentrate on
the very hard work of building a new Gaza, one that embraces peace and coexistence
and rejects terrorism and violence.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Algeria, Guyana, Pakistan,
Sierra Leone and Somalia for their initiative to convene this meeting. And I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.
The Palestinian question is at the core of the Middle East issue, bearing on the
Middle East’s peace and stability and global peace and security. Over seven decades
or so, the Palestinian-Israeli situation has, time and again, fallen into turmoil and
even led to the outbreak of wars, shaping the evolution of the international landscape
and the development of international relations. Since the start of the current Gaza
conflict, the Palestinian people have been deeply mired in suffering. Lebanon, Syria,
Yemen, Iran, among others, have witnessed escalating tensions, and even Qatar has
come under attack. The mounting conflicts and volatility in the Middle East have

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 21/34
worsened the global security environment, dampened the economic outlook for the
world and run counter to the common interests of the international community. It is
therefore imperative to make this issue a top priority and accelerate the resolution of
the Palestinian question, which lies at the heart of the current turmoil.
I will make four points in that regard.
First, we must bring an end to the tragedy in Gaza without delay. The conflicts
over the past two years have left Gaza devastated and scarred, with scenes of misery
and destruction everywhere. Yet Israel continues to escalate its military offensive,
causing even greater civilian casualties and displacements. There is no military
solution to the problem. An immediate ceasefire is the right way to save lives and
bring the hostages home. We urge Israel to cease all military actions in Gaza without
delay, fulfil its obligations as an occupying Power under international humanitarian
law and fully restore access to humanitarian supplies. Last week, the Security
Council draft resolution on Gaza was vetoed once again by a permanent member
(see S/PV.10000). We are deeply disappointed, and we expect the relevant country to
actively shoulder its responsibility and make earnest efforts to end the war.
Secondly, we must de-escalate tensions in the West Bank. Israel continues
to expand settlements there, forcibly demolishing Palestinian structures while
conducting frequent raids, arrests and attacks and condoning settler violence.
Recently, the occupying Power also approved and advanced the E1 settlement plan.
This dangerous action constitutes a grave violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions, undermining the territorial contiguity of Palestine and eroding
the foundation for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State. We call on
Israel to immediately cease all settlement activities, curb settler violence and lift
restrictions on Palestinian economic activities.
Thirdly, we must rectify the historical injustices suffered by the Palestinian
people. Israel has long established itself as an independent State. The Palestinian
people, however, remain without a homeland. This is the root of the problem. The
two-State solution is the only viable way to solve the Palestinian question. It is
irreplaceable and must not be denied. Yesterday, the General Assembly High-level
International Conference for the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine
and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution once again issued a strong call
in support of the two-State solution. A number of Western countries have recently
recognized the State of Palestine, one after another. The international community
should sustain the current momentum, strive to revitalize the prospect for the two-
State solution and support the early establishment of an independent Palestinian State
and its early admission as a full Member State of the United Nations. Both Gaza and
the West Bank are inalienable parts of the Palestinian territory. We must resolutely
oppose unilateral actions that undermine the foundation of the two-State solution.
Any day-after governance and reconstruction arrangements must respect the will
of the Palestinian people and uphold the legitimate rights of the Palestinian nation.
Fourthly, we must maintain peace and stability in the Middle East. From the onset
of the current Gaza conflicts, there have been frequent abuses of force and military
adventurism, which have triggered profound changes in the regional landscape.
The Middle East is once again standing at a historical crossroads. Relaxation or
escalation, dialogue or confrontation, peace or war — these are the choices that the
countries of the region and the international community should make collectively.
We call on all parties to effectively respect the sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity of countries in the Middle East. We call on Israel to earnestly respect the
rights to survival and development of the people in the Middle East. And we call on
countries of the region to prioritize long-term peace and security, uphold the vision
of common security, resolve differences through inclusiveness, address conflicts

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
22/34 25-24859
through dialogue, come together to shape a regional order based on equity and justice
and jointly build a future of peaceful development in the region.
China always upholds fairness and justice on the Palestinian question and
always firmly supports the just cause of the Palestinian people. Chinese President
Xi Jinping has put forward, in succession, the Global Security Initiative and the
Global Governance Initiative, contributing a Chinese plan to resolve conflicts
and hotspot issues, maintain international peace and multilateralism and enhance
global governance. They also provide important guidance for addressing Middle
East issues
Guided by these initiatives, China is committed to working with the international
community to promote a ceasefire, alleviate the humanitarian catastrophe, implement
the two-State solution and, ultimately, achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, so that both Palestinians and Israelis may live
in peace and happiness and the Middle East may embrace a future of lasting peace,
stability and shared prosperity.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in the Gaza Strip. We welcome the participation
of the ministers for foreign affairs of regional States and the relevant international
organizations in today’s meeting.
The crisis in Gaza has inflicted civilian casualties on a scale unseen in recent
decades, and has escalated tensions throughout the region, with violent flare-ups in
a number of neighbouring countries. In this context, we understand the desire of our
Middle Eastern partners to speak out on this urgent issue that directly affects each
of them.
In recent weeks, a number of major developments have taken place at the United
Nations regarding the Middle East. Those developments clearly reflect a growing
international consensus that Israel’s actions in the Gaza Strip — regardless of the
reasons for those actions — are unacceptable and cannot continue. On Thursday,
14 Council members voted in favour of draft resolution S/2025/583, demanding an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire, the release of all hostages held by Hamas,
the lifting of the severe humanitarian blockade of Gaza and the provision of safe
and unhindered access to those in need. Unfortunately, the United States blocked
the adoption of that draft resolution, casting its veto for the seventh time on this
issue. And yet, just before that, the Council did manage to adopt a press statement
(SC/16163) — albeit a very general one — condemning Israel’s attack on the sovereign
State of Qatar.
Although the United Nations has thus far been unable to stop the bloodshed in
Gaza or to compel Israel to return to the path of a two-State solution, the international
conference held in the General Assembly over the past two days achieved a symbolic
breakthrough as several States stepped forward to recognize Palestinian statehood.
This sends a belated but extremely important signal to Israel’s military and political
leadership that justice for the Palestinian people must be restored. Regrettably, it
took the deaths of more than 65,000 Palestinian civilians during nearly two years of
Israeli operations in Gaza for this to happen.
Recognition of the Palestinian State is not a favour to Ramallah but is a historic
duty owed to the Palestinian people — one that should have been fulfilled nearly 80
years ago. Russia has been calling for this for decades. Let me remind you that the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics recognized the State of Palestine back in 1988.
Israel, however, not only dismisses the calls of the international community but,
emboldened by its American allies, responds with threats, claiming that recognizing
Palestinian statehood rewards Hamas for the 7 October 2023 terrorist attack.

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 23/34
Officials in West Jerusalem, are already openly discussing the formal annexation of
the West Bank after the high-level week. That is why we must now clearly signal that
such steps are unacceptable. We must not be deterred by any threats of retaliation,
all the more so because, as the Secretary-General said, only our actions can put an
end to the current situation
The solidarity the international community now shows for the Palestinian
people’s aspirations to live peacefully in their own State generates a momentum that
we must collectively seize and translate into concrete, practical action. The immediate
imperative is to ensure that the crisis in Gaza is not resolved through imposing cruel
facts on the ground — in other words, by completely clearing out all Palestinians,
as the Israeli leadership intends — nor through their forced displacement from the
enclave for the sake of commercial redevelopment, as proposed by various radical
Western plans. Rather, the only path forward is through humane, civilized diplomacy
that brings together the efforts of the United Nations and regional Arab States as they
strive to help their Palestinian brethren.
Palestinians are not the subject of social experiments; they are a people that
deserves to exist as a sovereign nation, just as our own peoples do. However, no
diplomatic efforts can succeed unless Israeli authorities abandon their reliance on
military solutions and recognize that this approach offers no long-term benefit for
Israel, which cannot live in safety and stability while fighting on all fronts. All this
must also be recognized by Washington, which must stop treating United Nations
platforms and multilateral diplomacy as an enemy that allegedly undermines its own
efforts on the ground
Unfortunately, we are witnessing precisely the opposite trend. Both Israel and
the United States continue to claim that West Jerusalem is acting humanely in its
fight against terrorism. This is how Israeli officials justify strikes on hospitals and
schools, attacks on humanitarian convoys and the deaths of women, children and aid
workers. Hate speech and propaganda have resulted in dozens of innocent Palestinian
civilians being killed every day by the Israeli military, which firmly believes that
this is for the ultimate good of the Israeli State.
In this way, for nearly two years, West Jerusalem has been systematically
constructing and imposing a distorted narrative, in which Palestinians are second-
class people who can be exterminated, displaced, starved and killed — even at
humanitarian aid distribution points. United Nations leadership, its humanitarian
bodies and even Member States calling for a ceasefire and humanitarian access are
unabashedly being labelled by Israeli representatives as terrorist accomplices.
This radical reality-distorting rhetoric, along with West Jerusalem’s clear intent
to continuously escalate the situation in the region — a situation that has already
drawn in Lebanon, Syria, Iran, Yemen and Qatar — undermines any progress towards
a peaceful resolution of the Middle East crisis. The Israeli strike on Doha, one of
the key mediators in negotiations, clearly demonstrated that Israel is not focused
on diplomacy but rather on endless war, even at the cost of the remaining hostages,
whom this war leaves with no chance of survival.
It is also evident that Israel’s strategy implies bringing the entire Palestinian
territory, Gaza and the West Bank, under its complete control. Israeli officials make
no secret of their annexation plans; voicing them not only without embarrassment
but with pride, as if they were fulfilling their historical mission. And these are not
just empty words. Gaza is being systematically cleansed and carved up into so-
called security zones, which are shrinking day by day. The West Bank is being built
up with new Israeli settlements, while fanatical settlers, in the worst traditions of
colonialism of past centuries, harass the Palestinian population and drive them from
their homelands as the authorities stand by and do nothing. A policy of aggressive

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
24/34 25-24859
settlement is in full swing, whereby Palestinians are, at best, relegated to the role of
ghetto residents or, at worst, to becoming exiles.
This picture of appalling injustice, violence and the trampling of human dignity
unfolding in the occupied Palestinian territory is a call to immediate action. This is
what hundreds of thousands of people around the world are demanding of us in the
streets all over the world. They are clamouring for an end to the senseless bloodshed
in Gaza and the liberation of Palestine. This is also what Israeli hostages and their
families are demanding as they protest in Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and other cities, calling
for a comprehensive deal to release all hostages and end the fighting. No one wants
war — not ordinary Palestinians or ordinary Israelis. This heartfelt plea was voiced
by Israeli citizen Galit Dan, whose daughter and mother were killed on 7 October
2023. She said: “I don’t want revenge, I want hope. In the name of all those who
lost everything, and in the name of all those who can still be saved — please, stop
the war”.
We believe in the power of multilateral diplomacy. It has not always been entirely
effective, but it is still thanks to multilateral diplomacy that we have managed to
avoid a third world war over the 80 years since the establishment of the United
Nations. We are confident that this multilateral diplomacy can also help resolve
the protracted crisis in the Middle East. This requires the collective will of the
international community, which should be demonstrated not only in declarations
from high rostrums, but also in concrete actions. We strongly urge our American
colleagues to cast aside their rigid positions and engage in the real efforts that
the Security Council must undertake in accordance with its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. This will only benefit their closest ally, whose
security cannot be ensured by force alone. The fact that such an approach is a dead
end has been proven by decades of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
It is high time that we recognized that only a diplomatic settlement of the
Palestinian issue on the basis of the two-State solution can guarantee lasting peace
in the Middle East, the security of the Israeli people and the just aspirations of
the Palestinian people for their own State. Otherwise, the endless and senseless
massacre will continue, claiming ever more civilian lives, sowing discord between
new generations of Arabs and Israelis and destroying any prospect that they might
one day coexist peacefully and develop freely. We cannot allow that to happen. We
hope that other sensible members of the international community share this view.
We stand ready to work with them to finally make a peaceful and prosperous Middle
East a reality. This is the historic duty of the United Nations, the Security Council
and each and every one of us. We urge everyone to deliver on that duty.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset to thank the Korean presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important meeting and to thank the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) countries that are members of the Council
for requesting this meeting to highlight the horrific situation in Gaza as world
leaders meet here in New York. I also want to thank the high-level representatives
for participating in this meeting. Allow me to also thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his relentless efforts and his very moving and inspiring statements over these past
two days. Through him, we wish to also extend Palestine’s gratitude to the entire
United Nations and its personnel on the ground, in remembrance of those who were
killed while trying to save lives amid this genocide.
On Sunday afternoon, we adopted the Declaration for the Protection of
Humanitarian Personnel on the United Nations North Lawn. The Council has
adopted resolutions before on the protection of civilians, including children, women,

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 25/34
humanitarians and journalists. In Gaza not only do they not benefit from protection,
but they are primary targets of the Israeli onslaught.
The Palestinian people have suffered from the denial of their existence for
decades. Now we are being confronted yet again with an attempt to destroy our
nation altogether. Recognition of the State of Palestine is an affirmation that the
world rejects such a denial, that it rejects the attempts at our destruction and supports
our right to existence and self-determination. These are not gifts; they are rights.
The Palestinian people have been struggling for almost 100 years for the attainment
of such rights. It was not born recently. Recognition is also a clear indication that
the international community refuses to abandon the rule of international law and the
two-State solution, the only path to regional peace and security. This recognition is
not taking place in a vacuum. It is an integral part of the international mobilization
to end this horrific war and move towards peace. The New York Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of
the Two-State Solution, adopted in the General Assembly at the historic high-level
international conference co-chaired by Saudi Arabia and France, charts a clear path
to the independence and sovereignty of the State of Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions.
While all eyes were turned towards New York yesterday, as President Macron
took to the podium to announce the historic decision to recognize the State of Palestine
alongside other countries, including the United Kingdom, all minds and hearts were
turned towards Gaza. Ending the genocide in Gaza is the highest priority — one
that can suffer no delay and requires resolute action. Only an immediate ceasefire
can save lives: the lives of 2 million Palestinians, children, women and men, and the
lives of 20 Israeli hostages. The slaughter must stop. The destruction must stop. The
famine caused by the occupation must be brought to an end without delay. Israel must
fully withdraw its forces. The Palestinian people should have freedom and dignity.
We support the mediation efforts by the United States, Egypt and Qatar and
condemn yet again the Israeli strike on the territory of Qatar, a key mediator, as
it was convening a meeting to advance a ceasefire agreement and stop this never-
ending regional escalation. Nothing justifies delaying such a ceasefire, which is
the only way to stop the bloodshed, release the hostages and prisoners and human
remains, and allow unhindered humanitarian access. We need decisive actions to
deter the prolongation and escalation of this war, and we thank the countries who have
undertaken such measures. The Council has a sacred mandate, in this regard, that
it has been prevented from honouring. I thank Algeria and the 10 elected members
of the Council for their relentless efforts and for putting forward a draft resolution
(S/2025/583) last week to yet again pursue an immediate and unconditional ceasefire,
and I thank the 14 Council members that supported that draft resolution, which was
blocked by a veto.
The New York Declaration foresees the deployment of an international
stabilization mission upon the invitation of Palestine and mandated by the Security
Council to protect the Palestinian people, uphold the ceasefire, support the
Palestinian National Authority security forces and provide security guarantees to all.
This must be supported. The Gaza Strip must be reunified with the West Bank under
the Palestinian Authority, as reaffirmed repeatedly by the Council. We call for your
support for our policy of one Palestinian State, one Palestinian Government — one
law and one gun.
The Arab-OIC reconstruction plan must be implemented without delay.
Our people urgently need recovery, food, water, medicine, care, shelter and
healing. We are ready to work with the international community, with the United
Nations — including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East — leading humanitarian efforts, to make this happen. We

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
26/34 25-24859
are ready to work with the United States Administration. Our President reiterated
this yesterday in the General Assembly, and I will not react to the falsification of our
record by the new Permanent Representative of the United States. We will work with
this Administration and with Saudi Arabia, regional actors, France and international
partners and the members of the Council to advance these goals for peace.
Palestinians are not lesser beings. We are entitled to life, liberty and dignity.
The horrors inflicted by Israel upon our people in Gaza can have no justification.
Colonization and occupation have no justification. We are not condemned to
live under perpetual occupation, nor are Palestinians and Israelis condemned to
perpetual war. We are committed to peace in word and in deed, and we will honour
our obligations, but Israel must also be made to respect its obligations; it is not only
a one-way street. We say no genocide, no dispossession, no forcible displacement,
no colonization, no annexation, no occupation. A change is long overdue, and
the sea change that we are seeing across the world in support of Palestinian self-
determination and independence and in support of peace and security must lead to a
fundamental change on the ground. Save Gaza. Save Palestine. Save peace.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency, Mr. Jonas Støre, Prime
Minister of Norway.
Mr. Støre (Norway): I have requested to speak in order to make three essential
points about the horror that we are witnessing in Palestine. So, let me address them.
First, we join others in expressing our deepest concern about Israel’s expanded
military campaign, ongoing in Gaza as we meet. We reiterate our call for an immediate
ceasefire, drastically improved humanitarian access and the unconditional release of
the remaining hostages.
Secondly, while this crisis requires immediate action, it is just as important to
lay the foundations now for the day after the war and for the end to the conflict. As
the conference yesterday made clear, the overwhelming majority of Member States
of the United Nations consider the two-State solution to be the only credible basis for
peace in the Middle East — peace for Israelis and peace for Palestinians.
My capital city, Oslo, is in many ways synonymous with those efforts, thanks to
the Oslo Accords, which created the Palestinian Authority back in 1993. Ever since,
my country has worked towards one goal — peace, security and dignity for the
Palestinians and the Israelis, living side by side in two sovereign States, enjoying the
rights and obligations that follow from the Charter of the United Nations.
Norway recognized the State of Palestine in May last year. That gave a hand to
those on both sides who seek a peaceful solution. I need to say on behalf of those
who recognized Palestine yesterday that doing so amounts to turning one’s back on
terror. It amounts to turning one’s back on Hamas. It amounts to taking their voice
away and handing it to the peaceful among the Palestinians — the overwhelming
majority — who want to live, enjoying the rights and obligations under the Charter.
Our decision reflected a realization that the old approach of waiting for a negotiated
outcome before recognizing Palestine was no longer a feasible option. One party
simply refused to engage and vetoed progress. We cannot live with that. So let this
be clear: a Palestinian State has been part of the vision for decades. Today, we are far
from realizing it on the ground. But the international support for, and recognition of,
the State of Palestine is gaining momentum; the majority is growing. And I commend
France and Saudi Arabia for arranging the historic meeting in the General Assembly
yesterday. This week, two additional permanent members of the Security Council
declared that it was time.
That brings me to my third point: let us use this momentum to also mobilize the
necessary financial support to support the Palestinian authorities in the necessary

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 27/34
reforms, to implement the road map that was agreed in the General Assembly on
12 September and to resume meaningful engagement and decisive peace talks.
Norway will host, as it does every year, a ministerial meeting of the international
donor group for Palestine — the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians — in New York, this week. As
stated by Prime Minister Mustafa, the severe lack of funds represents an existential
and immediate threat to Palestinian State-building. Together with a broad group
of countries, we are working to raise emergency funding for that Palestinian
Government. We encourage all Member States to contribute, and we continue to call
on Israel to release tax revenue owed to Palestine. This is Palestinian value creation
being held and kept away, and that has to end. There will be no State of Palestine or
body to govern Gaza the day after the war ends without a functioning, reformed and
legitimate Palestinian Authority. That is critical for peace and security in the region,
including for Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am honoured to deliver this statement
on behalf of the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council States, namely the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Sultanate of
Oman, the State of Qatar and my country, the State of Kuwait.
At the outset, we would like to thank the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
States in the Security Council for requesting this emergency meeting, and we
extend our thanks to the Republic of Korea, which is presiding over the Council, for
convening this meeting at this critical time.
We meet today after nearly two years of tragedy in Gaza, in which the
defenceless Palestinian people are confronting the most horrific suffering, inflicted
by an oppressive, unjust siege and widespread devastation. The lives of thousands
of innocent civilians have been claimed. Most among the more than 60,000 martyrs
are women and children. What is happening in the Gaza Strip is no less than a
living example of genocide and ethnic cleansing — an open wound on the conscience
of humankind that cannot be ignored. We have followed, with concern, the recent
military escalation and condemn in the strongest terms the treacherous Israeli
attacks against the brotherly State of Qatar. We affirm, in no uncertain terms, that
any violation of the security of any Gulf State is an attack on all the States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council for our security, defence and destiny are shared.
A just and lasting peace in our region can be achieved only through a two-State
solution based on resolutions of international legitimacy, foremost among which are
the resolutions of the Council and the Arab Peace Initiative. This is the only way
to end the occupation, guarantee the legitimate rights of the brotherly Palestinian
people and establish their independent State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We warn against attempts to undermine or circumvent
this solution through settlement policies, displacement and the imposition of a fait
accompli. The international community, and the Security Council in particular, must
shoulder their full responsibilities to prevent these violations from continuing, ensure
that the perpetrators of crimes are held accountable and guarantee the Palestinian
people’s inalienable right to self-determination.
In this context, we welcome the recognition by some countries of the brotherly
State of Palestine yesterday at the High-level International Conference for the
Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the
Two-State Solution. These are welcome and courageous steps that are in line with
international law and in line with human rights.
In conclusion, the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council States reaffirm their steadfast
solidarity with the Palestinian people. We stand by all countries that are under attack,

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
28/34 25-24859
and, at the same time, we would like to emphasize that these crimes are not only
against the Palestinians. They present a threat to regional and international security.
We call upon the Council to translate its words into deeds, through tangible steps,
to end the aggression immediately, to guarantee immediate humanitarian access, to
protect civilians and to put an end to the illegal and unjust occupation. Otherwise,
we will never know security and safety.
Our utmost goal today and every day is peace. Enough Palestinian blood has
been shed and too many innocent souls have been lost. We cannot remain silent
anymore, and it is up to the international community to shoulder its responsibility
and to chart a course conducive to the two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
Mr. Gheit (spoke in Arabic): It has become clear that the Israeli war machine
cannot be stopped with appeals alone. The leaders of the occupation, intoxicated by
racist illusions, religious extremism and extremist nationalism, have been stripped
of all humanity and morality. What is required today are strict punitive measures
that convey the right message that the world today does not accept that genocide
should be part of its vocabulary.
We deeply regret the failure of the Council, time and again, and most recently a
few days ago, to put an end to the genocidal war waged by Israel against Gaza. This
war has lost even its abstract military logic, if it ever had such a logic. The use by a
permanent member of the Security Council of the veto, for the sixth time, to prevent
the adoption of a draft resolution (S/2025/583) that would put an immediate end to
war emboldens the leaders of the occupation to continue perpetrating crimes and
horrors indefinitely.
What Gaza is witnessing is unprecedented in its barbarity and brutality. Israel’s
objectives are now clear. The goal is to erase the Palestinian community from
existence and to displace the population, outside the Strip, after rendering their
land uninhabitable. I state unequivocally that yielding to this brutal and insane plan
deprives the Council of much of its legitimacy. It undermines its role in preserving
international peace and security. What is happening in Gaza will not remain confined
to Gaza, and the plan, relentlessly implemented by Israel, to reoccupy the Gaza
Strip and to displace its inhabitants will destabilize security in the entire region.
It will expand the cycle of conflict and it will create ongoing hotspots of tension
and violence
It is time for the Council to make the right decision, morally and practically,
to end this war, a war that has entered the realm of madness and that no longer has
any logic other than blind revenge against 2 million Palestinians, most of whom are
women and children.
Let us end this war today, not tomorrow. Let us start to rebuild Gaza immediately.
Let us return the children of Gaza, who have been out of school for two years,
to their deserved childhood. This was the appeal of the Secretary of State of the
United Kingdom.
Let us return this cause to its true path, which is the two-State solution, to which
there is no alternative, in order to establish a lasting peace and to end the cycle of
violence. Violence will inevitably recur in the future if the mindset of blind revenge
prevails, revenge that is based on racial superiority.
We say loudly, enough. End the bloodshed and the killing that have stained our
collective humanity. This is the Council’s responsibility to history.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Kallas.

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 29/34
Ms. Kallas: If a military solution were possible in Gaza, Israel’s war on Hamas
would already be over and the hostages would have been released. Instead, the war
continues, and famine has set in, a famine that was avoidable, had aid been let in.
We have a collective responsibility to change this situation. Therefore, I repeat
here the calls for an immediate ceasefire, the release of all hostages and the entry of
humanitarian aid into Gaza at scale.
Europe has been the most active global actor in Gaza. We are the largest
humanitarian donor. We have helped the Palestinians more than any other party.
We negotiated, with the Israeli Government, a humanitarian understanding with
specific benchmarks. Since then, more trucks have entered Gaza, more aid has been
delivered, the Jordanian and Egyptian routes have been reopened and repairs to
critical infrastructure have been carried out. In August, a ship carrying 1,200 tons of
aid departed from Limassol, Cyprus. Further shipments will continue.
But we all know it is not enough. That is why the European Union is pulling
other levers to try to push the Israeli Government to change its course of action.
We recently proposed sanctions on extremist ministers in the Israeli Government,
sanctions on violent settlers in the West Bank and entities supporting their impunity,
additional sanctions on Hamas terrorists and the suspension of trade concessions
with Israel. This is a message to the current Israeli Government: change course and
address the humanitarian suffering.
In addition, another fundamental question hangs over us: how to square Israel’s
legitimate right to live in safety and security with the future Palestinian State. We
have always believed that there is one answer: two States, side by side. As we saw
during yesterday’s conference, the weight of the world is behind the two-State
solution. The European Union has worked hard to make this possible.
The European Union is also the leading supporter of the Palestinian Authority.
We will provide €1.6 billion over the next three years. We also kept Palestinian
institutions functioning during this war, including education. We have now launched
the forum to finance the future for the Palestinian people, the Palestine Donor Forum.
The Global Alliance for the Implementation of the Two-State Solution remains the
best mechanism for discussions on how to turn commitments into actions.
There must be a turning point in this war. It cannot be at the expense of either
the viability of a Palestinian State or the legitimate concerns of Israel. We have the
power to change the course of this conflict, to see the release of remaining hostages,
to prevent further civilian suffering and see an end to this war.
The President: I now give floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Yılmaz (Türkiye): I am delivering this statement on behalf of Minister for
Foreign Affairs Hakan Fidan.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Member States
belonging to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as the
Chair of the OIC Group.
Let me express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
which is taking place on the very auspicious occasion of the eightieth annual session
of the General Assembly.
There is no doubt that the unprecedented crisis and the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, have further deteriorated as a result of the continued Israeli
onslaught against the Palestinian people. Prior to the recent official confirmation
of the Israeli genocide in the occupied Palestinian territory by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
30/34 25-24859
including East Jerusalem, and Israel, the OIC Group also decried the unprecedented
humanitarian consequences of the long-drawn-out Israeli military onslaught in Gaza
and elsewhere in the occupied Palestinian territory. The Group has also drawn the
attention of the Council to the dangerous escalation of the war crimes and crimes
against humanity perpetrated by the Israeli occupying Power against the Palestinian
people through the systematic targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including the siege and the disruption of and attacks on food supply chains, water
and medical facilities, among others.
We note that the actions of the Israeli occupying Power amount to ethnic cleansing,
illegal blockade, the use of starvation as a weapon of war, colonial settlement,
apartheid policies, acts of settler colonialism and terrorism. Land confiscation and
home demolition, including attacks on Islamic and Christian holy sites, are acts of
genocide and crimes against humanity and constitute a grave violation of the historic
status quo in the holy sites of Jerusalem. Consequently, we reaffirm the decision of
the twenty-first extraordinary meeting of the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers held
in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on 25 August 2025 on the significance of the
case Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel), presented to the International
Court of Justice on Israel’s violation of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We therefore call on the Council to take
urgent measures to hold Israel accountable for these genocidal acts, including by
invoking Chapter VII measures, to bring a halt to the bloodshed and to all of these
crimes and to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people.
While we had earlier condemned the Israeli military attack against Qatar on
9 September 2025, we consider the unjustified and illegal action on the part of the
Israeli authorities as a desperate move to frustrate the global efforts to achieve a
ceasefire and put an end to the siege on Palestine. We commend the declaration
by Qatar on the continuation of its mediation efforts, along with Egypt, towards
securing a permanent, immediate and unconditional ceasefire and an end to the
war in Gaza. Consequently, we support the urgent implementation of the Arab-
OIC reconstruction plan to allow for early recovery and reconstruction in the Gaza
Strip, while rejecting forced displacement and ensuring that the Palestinian people
remain in their land, and we encourage all Member States to participate actively in
the international conference in Cairo, which is aimed at mobilizing political and
financial support for the plan
In the same vein, we commend States Members of the United Nations and
the citizenry of the world for their overwhelming support for the legitimate cause
of the Palestinian people and for their inalienable rights, including to return,
to self-determination, to the independence of the State of Palestine and to the
implementation of the two-State solution. To this end, we hail the recent adoption of
the New York Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine
and the Implementation of the Two-State Solution through an overwhelming vote in
the General Assembly on 12 September 2025 (General Assembly decision 80/506).
We commend the actions taken by many States towards the recognition of the State
of Palestine and to bring an end to this illegal occupation and ensure the realization
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and the achievement of a just and
lasting solution
We reiterate that the time has come for the Council to assume its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, including by approving the
admission of the State of Palestine as a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
We reiterate that the pathway to the resolution of this prolonged and historic injustice
is the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to their national
homeland, the implementation of the International Court of Justice advisory opinion

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 31/34
and of the relevant United Nations resolutions on the question of Palestine and the
implementation of the two-State solution. That is the key to peace and security in the
Middle East and in our world.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome the briefing presented
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council today, and we thank him for his
tireless efforts to achieve peace in the region
From day one, Egypt has strived to end the war in the Gaza Strip, driven by
its firm belief that if the situation is not kept under control, the region will be
plunged into an unprecedented period of instability. The ensuing days have proven
those estimations correct. Attempts to end the war have been met with unjustified
intransigence on Israel’s part on more than one occasion, and at no point has it been
possible to end the war or stop the bloodshed.
Israel’s true intentions vis-à-vis Gaza and the Palestinian question are no longer
a secret to anyone, as Israel’s declarations and actions reveal a bona fide attempt
to re-engineer the Palestinian existence in Gaza. This includes the displacement of
a significant portion of the population by means of military operations, starvation
and the elimination of the essentials needed to sustain life in Gaza. The ongoing
ground military operation to storm Gaza City is part of the bid to carry out that
malevolent scheme. Egypt affirms its categorical rejection of that scheme and of all
its repercussions. Such measures lack any legal or moral basis, and they imperil the
peace that has reigned for nearly five decades in a manner that poses unimaginable
potential threats to all the countries of the region
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip has reached a catastrophic stage.
That is due to the many obstacles created by Israel to impede the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and of other United Nations and
humanitarian organizations working inside the Strip. These measures have led to
an unprecedented catastrophic situation and subjected the people of Gaza to famine.
The results of the report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel were
conclusive. It was confirmed that Israel has perpetrated the crime of genocide and
that the moral and material elements of genocide were committed against civilians
in the Gaza Strip.
Egypt has approached this catastrophic situation with the utmost wisdom,
refusing to be dragged into any polemics or to escalate the matter in a way that would
further exacerbate the situation. Egypt has taken care to avoid any provocation, out
of its conviction that a ceasefire is the first step required to set in motion a political
process that will defuse the crisis and serve as the starting point for serious discussions
about Gaza’s future and the future of the Palestinian question as a whole. Egypt is
determined to continue its efforts with all mediators to achieve this noble goal.
Egypt also intends to host a conference on early recovery and reconstruction in
the Gaza Strip as soon as a ceasefire is reached. This will mobilize the necessary
support for implementation of the Arab-Islamic plan for the reconstruction of Gaza at
the hands of Palestinians, with a view to countering any plans for displacement. The
first task for all of us must be to empower Palestinian decision-making to carry out
the administration of the Strip in a way that will preserve the unity of the Palestinian
territory from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank, including occupied East Jerusalem,
under one authority, one government, one law and one gun.
It has become clear to all that in addition to reconstruction, security arrangements
on the ground and an end to the current catastrophic situation in Gaza are absolutely

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
32/34 25-24859
necessary steps. They cannot be taken practically on the ground without a political
horizon that includes a comprehensive and just settlement of the Palestinian issue
based on the two-State solution and the establishment of the Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital on the lines of 4 June 1967. This must be accompanied
by genuine international will in support of peace and stability in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Misnad (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, we would like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea for convening this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The past month, and particularly the high-level week, has seen crystallization of
an unprecedented consensus in support of a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
issue and the two-State solution in accordance with international law and international
resolutions. This has been borne out by the speeches delivered by Presidents and
Heads of State and Government during the general discussion in the General
Assembly and during the ministerial conference held on Monday and co-chaired
by Saudi Arabia and France, in which Qatar participated at the highest level. Many
States declared their recognition of the State of Palestine, as part of the international
momentum to resolve the longest outstanding issue on the United Nations agenda.
This consensus has been embodied by numerous General Assembly resolutions,
of which the most recent was the resolution on the participation of the State of Palestine
(resolution 80/1). We would hope that the Security Council will join this consensus
by adopting the draft resolution put forward by the elected members. The Council,
by virtue of its basic mandate, has the responsibility to take the measures necessary
to end the human disaster in Gaza, prevent genocide and forced displacement and
adopt a binding resolution under Chapter VII to compel Israel to comply with an
immediate ceasefire.
Experience has shown that mediation and diplomacy are the only ways to resolve
conflicts. Efforts undertaken by Qatar alongside the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
United States of America have garnered wide appreciation; the importance of those
efforts was underscored in resolution 2735 (2024). However, those efforts received
a treacherous blow when, on 9 September, an Israeli air attack targeted a residential
zone in Doha that is home to some 5,000 citizens and residents. In the course of that
attack, a member of our domestic security forces, Badr al-Dosari, age 22, was killed,
and 18 others were injured. This attack on a mediating State is not only a blatant
violation of our sovereignty, international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It is also a direct attack on the principle of mediation as a choice for
resolving conflicts. Protecting mediators is not just a political issue, but a cornerstone
of protecting international peace and security. International solidarity with Qatar
has been clear, whether in the statement issued by the Council on 11 September
(SC/16163) or in the communiqué adopted by the Doha ministerial conference, which
called the attack a major threat to regional security that undermines prospects for
peace and efforts to restore calm.
Israeli violations of international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian
territory are continuing in systematic fashion. Civilians are being targeted. Starvation
is being used as a weapon. Infrastructure and hospitals are being destroyed. Forced
displacement is being implemented. There is also the threat to illegally annex the
West Bank. Settlement expansion continues. There are repeated attacks on Islamic
and Christian places of worship. These are all major violations of international law
and a threat to the two-State solution.

23/09/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.10003
25-24859 33/34
There have also been repeated Israeli attacks on the territory of neighbouring
States, including Syria and Lebanon. That undermines stability and increases the
chances of the theatre of conflict widening. That threat to international peace and
security places on the Council an urgent responsibility. A just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be achieved by ignoring the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people or by imposing facts on the ground by force. It can only be
achieved by sticking to the Arab Peace Initiative and complying with the relevant
international resolutions
We therefore call on the international community, and the Council in particular,
to assume its legal and moral responsibility and take practical steps to set a binding
timetable to end the Israeli occupation and ensure the full recognition of the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Lastly, we call on the United Nations to use all possible mechanisms to bring
about an immediate ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. Unconditional entry of humanitarian
assistance must be guaranteed, the siege must be lifted, and mediators and mediation
efforts must be protected as an essential tool for conflict resolution and peace. Action
must be taken to reach a final political settlement based on the two-State solution in
order to maintain international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): The Gaza Strip is suffering
from a catastrophic reality that is deteriorating day by day on all levels, due to an
unprecedented military escalation and the absence of an effective political horizon.
This has led to a collapse of all the elements of life and security. Continued attacks
and the years-long siege have made the Strip a central hotspot that is a threat to the
stability of the entire region and a real danger to peace and security in the region and
the world. These repeated Israeli attacks, which fly in the face of the principles of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the most basic international
norms, are the result of the absence of accountability and penalty mechanisms. The
Security Council and the international community have been unable to deter the
aggressor and stop the violations. The situation has reached an extremely dangerous
point that threatens to empty the concept of national sovereignty of all meaning. It
threatens the credibility of this Organization and the foundations of international
legitimacy and undermines diplomatic and negotiated solutions. It poses an ominous
threat to the security of the region and the world.
In years past, we have made clear before the Council the dangerous situation in
Gaza and the repercussions for the Middle East of the aggressive regional conflict
approach of the Israeli authorities. They are insisting on dragging the countries of
the region down a dark path surrounded by folly, hatred and war at the expense
of security, peace and coexistence among its peoples. We are still witnessing the
repercussions of the lack of any firm measures to deter Israel from continuing its
violations and trampling on the laws and norms that prevail among the members of
the international community. Its unilateral attacks continued unabated. Can sound
logic accept that it targeted the territory of the sisterly country of Qatar and violated
its sovereignty just as it was embarking on its most recent effort to mediate an end to
the war? What we see repeatedly is the insistence of the Israeli side on blocking the
path to finding a peaceful solution to stop the bloodshed, put an end to the suffering
of civilians and protect the region in the wake of continued escalation and the scourge
of war.
In the face of this reality, we renew our calls for the Council to fulfil the
responsibilities that are its raison d’être, by taking deterrent international measures
for accountability vis-à-vis the recklessness and folly of the Israeli Government
in order to safeguard regional and international peace and security and preserve

S/PV.10003 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 23/09/2025
34/34 25-24859
what remains of the credibility and legitimacy of the international system. Such
immediate and serious international action is a necessity that cannot be delayed to
stop the aggression, end the siege and pave the way towards a comprehensive and
just peace through the two-State solution and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State along 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: The representative of the United States has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Ms. Locetta (United States of America): I must take the floor to respond to my
Palestinian colleague’s comments.
As Ambassador Waltz noted, the Palestinian Authority has failed to meet its own
Oslo commitments, to renounce terrorism and violence and to resolve issues through
direct negotiations with Israel. These are not falsehoods but facts.
We call on the Palestinian Authority to halt its pushes for the unilateral
recognition of statehood. Instead, it must focus on actions that will not empower
Hamas but rather will create a better future for the people of Palestine. We reiterate
again that all hostages — living and deceased — must be released immediately.
The meeting rose at 3:50 p.m.
