2 Prada Street
St. Clair
Newtown 190325
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Tel: (868) 623-6894
Fax: (868) 623-5853
E-mail: communications@foreign.gov.tt
Website: www.foreign.gov.tt
Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Ministry of Foreign and CARICOM Affairs
MEDIA RELEASE
RECOGNITION BY TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO OF
THE STATE OF PALESTINE
PORT OF SPAIN: 02ND MAY, 2024
The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago has taken the decision, at its meeting of
Cabinet today, to formally recognise the State of Palestine. As recommended by the Minister of
Foreign and CARICOM Affairs, Cabinet has determined that the formal recognition of Palestine by
the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago will assist in the achievement of a lasting peace by strengthening
the growing international consensus on the issue of Palestinian statehood.
Trinidad and Tobago has a long history of principled support for the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination. The Government’s consistent position is that a two-State solution is the only
way out of the ongoing cycle of violence. This is our consistent foreign policy position, which is
founded on Trinidad and Tobago’s respect for and adherence to international law and to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
This support has been consistently demonstrated through the endorsement by Trinidad and Tobago
of key resolutions on Palestine at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Such resolutions
include Resolution 67/19, which accorded Palestine Non-Member Observer State status in the
UNGA, and the annual resolutions of the UNGA on the Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian
people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population
in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources and the Peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine. Since the outbreak of the most recent round of violent conflict in Gaza in October 2023,
Trinidad and Tobago also supported resolutions adopted at the Emergency Special Sessions of the
UNGA held on October 27 and December 10, 2023, on the Protection of civilians and upholding
legal and humanitarian obligations.
On the issue of Palestinian statehood, Dr. the Honourable Keith Rowley, Prime Minister, is on record
at the post-Cabinet media briefing of October 26, 2023 as stating as follows: “The position of Trinidad
and Tobago on that matter remains the same. It is that we support the two-State policy, where peace
and sustainable development can come to the people of the Middle East, Israel and its neighbours,
2/…

2 Prada Street
St. Clair
Newtown 190325
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Tel: (868) 623-6894
Fax: (868) 623-5853
E-mail: communications@foreign.gov.tt
Website: www.foreign.gov.tt
Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Ministry of Foreign and CARICOM Affairs
-2-
recognizing Israel’s right to exist and also the right of the Palestinians to a State of their own. That is
Trinidad and Tobago’s position, that was our position. That is our position, war or no war, because
we believe it is the only option, of all the options available, that provides any possibility for a
recession of the hostility and the hatred to be replaced by peaceful coexistence.”
Further, in the seven months since the start of the war in Gaza, Senator the Honourable Dr. Amery
Browne, Minister of Foreign and CARICOM Affairs, has articulated the position of Trinidad and
Tobago on this issue; condemned the killing of civilians in Gaza and Israel; expressed support for the
two-State solution; and called for an immediate ceasefire, the exercise of restraint, regard for civilian
lives and welfare, dialogue and diplomacy.
Today’s Cabinet decision is consistent with these public statements by the Prime Minister and the
Minister of Foreign and CARICOM Affairs.
Trinidad and Tobago has been a longstanding advocate of the two-State solution, as we believe that
this is the only credible path to peace and security for Palestinians, the Israelis and, by extension, the
wider region. Recognition of Palestine is moral and just and demonstrates Trinidad and Tobago’s
acknowledgement of and support for the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian People.
Trinidad and Tobago will join 141 other countries that recognize Palestine, Algeria being the first
to have done so in 1988.
Ministry of Foreign and CARICOM Affairs
