Israel Ministry of Defense
15/8/2026
Minister of Defense Israel Katz today (Sunday) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Honduras' Minister of Defense, Enrique Rodríguez Burchard, to deepen defense cooperation between the State of Israel and the Republic of Honduras.
The signing ceremony took place during an official visit by a senior delegation from Honduras' Ministry of Defense to Israel, attended by Israel Ministry of Defense (IMOD) Director General Maj. Gen. (Res.) Amir Baram, the Senior Deputy Head of the Policy and Political-Military Bureau, Israel's Defense Attaché to Honduras, and additional senior officials from the defense ministries of both countries.
Honduras is an important partner of Israel in Central America, and has been notable over the years for its support of Israel in the international arena. The MOU signed today constitutes a significant milestone in strengthening defense relations between the two countries and establishes a framework for long-term cooperation based on shared interests and values.
During the visit, the Honduran Minister of Defense, the Minister of Internal Security, and the Chief of the Joint Staff of the Honduran Armed Forces held wide-ranging security discussions, during which IMOD Director General Maj. Gen. (Res.) Amir Baram presented the Ministry's strategy.
As part of the dialogue, the parties discussed a range of shared strategic and security issues and examined ways to expand cooperation between the two countries. The Honduran delegation received a briefing on the security and operational challenges Israel has faced in recent years, including key lessons from the multi-front war and from contending with evolving and emerging threats in the region.
The delegation was briefed on the IMOD's capabilities and activities, as well as key aspects of Israel's defense and defense-industrial establishment. The parties explored relevant opportunities to expand defense cooperation, including in areas of mutual interest.
The MOU with Honduras joins a series of defense cooperation agreements advanced by the IMOD over the past year with partners around the world, as part of the Ministry's strategy to expand Israel's circle of defense partnerships, strengthen strategic ties with friendly nations, and deepen cooperation between Israel's defense industries and international markets.
NEWSLETTER
Join the GlobalSecurity.org mailing list
