Acting as a Force for World Peace and Stability
Remarks by H.E. Wang Yi
Member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China
At the G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
Johannesburg, February 20, 2025
Dear colleagues,
Let me begin by congratulating South Africa on assuming the G20 presidency. I also thank the South African government for the thoughtful arrangements accorded to the Chinese delegation.
The current international landscape is marked by transformation and turbulence. Regional conflicts and turmoil break out from time to time. The global security deficit keeps growing. At the Rio de Janeiro Summit last November, G20 leaders pledged to build a just world and a sustainable planet, highlighted the importance of diplomacy and dialogue and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, and undertook to support all efforts conducive to addressing crises.
Today, as we G20 foreign ministers gather together, it is time to renew our commitment to the consensus of the Rio Summit, which is to act as a joint force for world peace and stability and build a safer world. To that end, China will work with all parties in the following areas:
First, acting as the guardians of world peace. Countries should respect each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and respect the development paths and social systems independently chosen by each other. Countries should persevere with dialogue and negotiation, and seek peaceful settlement to differences and political solution to international and regional hotspot issues. Bloc confrontation and interference in other countries’ internal affairs must be rejected. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, initiated by China and some other Global South countries 70 years ago, remain as relevant as ever under current circumstances.
Second, acting as the builders of universal security. Humanity is a community with a shared future. It is also an indivisible community of shared security. A country must not pursue its own security at the expense of the security of other countries, and the legitimate security concerns of all countries should be taken seriously. In this connection, President Xi Jinping has proposed the Global Security Initiative, which advocates the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, a new path to security featuring dialogue rather than confrontation, partnership rather than alliance, and win-win rather than zero-sum, and a joint response to traditional and nontraditional security risks and challenges. China is ready for closer exchanges and cooperation with all sides in this regard.
Third, acting as the defenders of multilateralism. This year marks the 80th anniversary of the United Nations. It is also the 80th anniversary of the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War. As the international situation becomes more complex and global challenges more acute, it is all the more important to defend the authority of the U.N. and give full play to its role. Last year, G20 foreign ministers launched a Call to Action on Global Governance Reform, which is essentially about supporting multilateralism and strengthening the role of the U.N. We need to translate that initiative into action and firmly safeguard the international system with the U.N. at its core, the international order underpinned by international law, and the basic norms governing international relations based on the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter.
The previous speakers have all talked about the Ukraine crisis. China has noticed that recently the calls for peace talks are rising and the window of opportunity for peace is opening. Although the parties have different positions and it is hard to find simple solutions to complex issues, dialogue is always better than confrontation and peace talks better than fighting. Here, let me reiterate the following: China always calls for an early and peaceful settlement of the crisis and has been actively promoting peace talks in line with President Xi Jinping’s four-point observations about what must be done. China supports all efforts dedicated to peace, including the recent consensus reached between the United States and Russia. We hope that the relevant parties can find a sustainable and lasting solution that takes into account each other’s concerns. Acting on the wishes of the relevant parties and keeping in mind the concerns of the international community, especially those of the Global South, China will continue playing a constructive role in the political settlement of the crisis.
The conflict in Gaza has caused an unprecedented humanitarian disaster. The flames of war must not be reignited, and the ceasefire agreement must be implemented in a continuous and effective manner. Gaza and the West Bank are the homeland of the Palestinian people. “The Palestinians governing Palestine” is an important principle that must be upheld in the post-conflict governance of Gaza, and the two-State solution is the only viable way out. The historical injustice on the Palestinian question has remained unaddressed for over seven decades. The issue should not be marginalized once again.
The international community should respect the choice made by the Syrian people, and at the same time, strictly prevent extremist forces from spreading and gaining strength in Syria and deny violent terrorists any safe haven in Syria.
Colleagues,
This year represents an “African moment” at the G20. After welcoming the African Union as a full member, the G20 is going to have a summit on the African continent for the first time. We must listen to what Africa has to say, take Africa’s concerns seriously, support Africa’s actions, and work for peace and development in Africa, so as to leave a distinct African mark on the Johannesburg Summit. China firmly supports the African people in independently resolving African problems, and opposes external interference in the internal affairs of African countries. We believe that the African people have the wisdom, capability and right to take good care of their own affairs, and that the AU’s goal of Silencing the Guns in Africa will be achieved.
Let me conclude with a quote from Nelson Mandela, “It is so easy to break down and destroy. The heroes are those who make peace and build.” China will work with all parties to pool more consensus for peace, bolster the force for peace, and build a world of lasting peace and universal security.
Thank you.
