H.E. Ms Kaja Kallas,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice President of the European Commission
April 17, 2026
Dear High Representative,
We, the Foreign Ministers of Ireland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Kingdom of Spain express our deepest concern regarding several measures by the Israeli government, including executive decisions, military decisions and laws adopted by the Knesset, that contravene human rights and violate international law and international humanitarian law. Our many statements in this regard, and direct calls for the Government of Israel to fully comply with its international and moral obligations, and to revert those measures, have been ignored.
In such a grave situation, we call on the European Union to uphold its moral and political responsibility, and to defend the very core values that have underpinned the European project since its foundation. Respect for human rights must remain a fundamental pillar and guiding principle of all our actions and of all our relationships with our partners. By principled coherence and for the sake of its own credibility, the European Union can no longer remain silent or inactive in the face of such breaches.
The latest example is the approval of the death penalty by the Israeli Parliament. Not only a grave violation of fundamental human rights, but also a step backwards in Israel’s commitment to democratic principles, as underlined by your 31 March statement, and therefore a violation of Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement. The bill passed by the Israeli Parliament constitutes an additional step in the systematic persecution, oppression, violence and discrimination exerted against the Palestinian population.
These recent actions further aggravate an already critical situation. Conditions in Gaza are unbearable, marked by continuous violations of the ceasefire agreement and the clearly insufficient entry of humanitarian aid into the Strip. The situation in the West Bank is rapidly deteriorating, with escalating violence against Palestinians: radical settlers are acting with absolute impunity, and alongside ongoing military operations by the Israel Defense Forces, are resulting in the intolerable deaths of innocent civilians. Statements by extremist ministers of the Israeli government are inciting dangerous levels of violence. At the same time, recurrent attacks against religious freedom and its exercise by Muslims and Christians are challenging the traditional status quo of the Holy Land. These developments are causing unacceptable human suffering, undermining the implementation of the two-State solution and threatening the viability of the Palestinian state.
We welcome the ceasefire in Lebanon and call all the parties to act with restraint and responsibility for the end of all violence and attacks. Military operations being carried out with absolute disregard of international law and international humanitarian law, destroying civilian infrastructure and forcing Lebanese citizens to leave their homes with no prospects of coming back, must stop immediately. More than 1.2 million people have already been forced to leave their homes, according to the United Nations, further aggravating the humanitarian crisis. Statements by Israeli authorities, announcing the intentions of occupying the Lebanese territory south of the Litani, and to obliterate the houses of the Lebanese civil population is a flagrant violation of international law, which cannot be allowed to go unanswered.
In light of these grave circumstances, we ask that the next meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council includes a discussion of the EU-Israel Association-Agreement. The earlier review of Israel’s compliance with its obligations under Article 2 of the Agreement was clear that Israel is in breach of its human rights obligations, and the situation has only deteriorated since then. Given the level of violence and the gravity of the current situation, there is a need to urgently revisit the question of the EU’s response, including the proposals put forward by the President of the Commission. Bold and immediate action is required, and all actions must remain on the table. The European Union can no longer remain on the sidelines.
Yours sincerely,
H.E. Mr. José Manuel Albares
Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation of the Kingdom of Spain
H.E. Ms. Tanja Fajon
Deputy Prime Minister Minister of Foreign and European Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia
H.E. Ms Helen McEntee
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade and Minister for Defence of Ireland
