Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9609
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9609th meeting
Thursday, 18 April 2024, 5 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mrs. Frazier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malta)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bendjama
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fu Cong
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Gasca
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Uemura
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sangjin Kim
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kanu
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Žbogar
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wood
Agenda
Admission of new members
Letter dated 3 April 2024 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2024/286)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-10590 (E)
*2410590*

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
2/13 24-10590
The meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new members
Letter dated 3 April 2024 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2024/286)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
In a letter dated 2 April 2024 addressed to the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine referred to the application
of the State of Palestine for membership in the United
Nations, contained in document S/2011/592, dated
23 September 2011, and requested that renewed
consideration be given to that application by the
Security Council. The letter has been issued as
document S/2024/286.
The report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of the State
of Palestine for admission to membership in the United
Nations has been issued as document S/2024/313.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2024/312, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): Before I deliver my
statement, I would like to express my gratitude to you,
Madam President, for organizing this meeting and for
your outstanding efforts in presiding over the Security
Council this month; we truly value your hard work and
personal commitment.
On behalf of my country, Algeria, on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and on behalf of countless
other peace-loving countries, I stand before the highest
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security to introduce the draft resolution
(S/2024/312) on the admission of the State of Palestine
to the United Nations.
On 15 November 1988, my country, Algeria, was
home to the declaration of the independence of the State
of Palestine. Today the call of history resounds once
again, and it is my honour to put before the Council
the recommendation to admit the State of Palestine as a
full Member of the United Nations. It is a critical step
towards rectifying a long-standing injustice. The late
Yasser Arafat, in his epic declaration proclaiming the
State of Palestine, lamented the exclusion of Palestinians
from the international community. He said,
“At a time when the contemporary world was
formulating its new value system, the balance of
local and global power excluded the Palestinians
from the common destiny”.
It became clear, once again, that justice alone does
not move the wheel of history. And, of course, today
we are striving to answer Yasser Arafat’s call by urging
our colleagues in the Security Council to vote in favour
of admitting Palestine. It is the least we could all do to
honour the debt — yes, the debt — we owe to its people.
We say it loudly: the international community stands
with Palestine. We remain steadfast in our commitment
to a peaceful, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State. That historical injustice must be addressed. The
scale of justice must be rebalanced.
We firmly believe that Palestine fulfils all United
Nations membership criteria as defined by the founding
fathers in the Charter of the United Nations. We urge
every Member to support the draft resolution. It is
time for Palestine to take its rightful place among
the community of nations. Seeking United Nations
membership is a fundamental expression of Palestinian
self-determination. The admission strengthens, not
undermines, the two-State solution, a solution constantly
under threat from those who seek to erase Palestinian
identity and Palestinian aspirations. Peace will come
from Palestine’s inclusion, not from its exclusion.

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 3/13
While acknowledging the challenges — colonization,
annexation, violence and the denial of Palestinian
rights — our response must be clear: admit Palestine,
as the first fundamental step towards peace. That
membership will definitely consecrate the two-State
solution that the occupying authorities continue openly
to stand against. That membership will constitute a
rejection of their attempt to erase the Palestinian people
and to destroy the Palestinian State and every prospect
of peace.
Let us welcome Palestine to the United Nations and,
in doing so, relaunch a genuine peace process between
equals, paving the way for a lasting peace in the Middle
East. Failure to do so is again a denial by the Council
itself of its responsibilities. Failure to act is a serious
and unforgivable mistake. Failure to wake up today is
licence for continued injustice and impunity. Failure
to do so is everlasting shame. The call for Palestinian
freedom must be heeded. The call for a free Palestine
resonating across the globe must become a reality
enjoyed by the Palestinian people.
I conclude with what the President of the Republic,
Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, stated before the General
Assembly last year.
“The time has come for Palestine to become a full
Member of the United Nations, even though its
territory remains occupied. We will not abandon
this cause. And we will not rest until the objective
is achieved.”
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/2024/312.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, China, Ecuador, France, Guyana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Sierra Leone, Slovenia
Against:
United States
Abstaining:
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The President: The draft resolution received 12
votes in favour, 1 against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This day could have gone down in history
as a day when, after three quarters of a century, the
international community at last made the right choice on
the path towards correcting the many years of historical
injustice done to Palestine and the legitimate aspirations
of its heroic people. Because it was essentially a simple
question — are the Palestinians worthy of being part
of the global family, fully participating in all of the
decisions of international life? — a question to which
we have repeatedly answered “yes” when Israel was
welcomed into the United Nations and when dozens of
States also were released from the colonial yoke and
were welcomed into the United Nations.
However, our American colleagues believe
differently. Having used their veto for the fifth time
since the beginning of the escalation in Gaza, they have
once again demonstrated what they really think of the
Palestinians. For Washington, they do not deserve to
have their own State; they are only a barrier on the path
towards realizing the interests of Israel.
For that reason, the United States is ready, until
eternity, to turn a blind eye to the crimes of Israel against
the civilians in Gaza and ignore the illegal settlement
construction activity in West Jerusalem on the West
Bank. The aim is to break the Palestinians’ will, to force
them once and for all to submit to the occupying Power,
to turn them into servants and second-class persons and
perhaps, once and for all, to exterminate them and force
them out of their native territory.
That policy is only having the opposite impact
at present — an absolute majority of the global
community supports Palestine’s application to become
a full Member of the world Organization. The suffering
of Palestinian civilians is resounding in the hearts
and minds of millions of people around the world. In
countries that supply weapons to West Jerusalem, there
are louder and louder voices calling for those supplies
to be banned.
Today’s use of the veto by the United States
delegation is a hopeless attempt to stop the inevitable
course of history. The results of the voting, where
Washington was practically in complete isolation, speak
for themselves. Playing into the hands of their ally and
its most reckless actions and turning away from finding
just solutions on the basis of existing international legal

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
4/13 24-10590
norms is a direct path towards further sliding into the
mire of war, which could encompass the entire region.
Even if the United States and Israel benefit,
it will only be for the short term. At the same time,
Washington will once and for all remove itself from the
list of peace-loving and respected States, having fully
shared responsibility with its Israeli allies for the deaths
of tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians. That is not
worthy of a great Power, and history will not forgive
it for that. We call on the United States to listen to the
voice of reason, to think about the consequences of its
decisions and to immediately join in the efforts of the
other members of the Security Council to establish an
immediate ceasefire in Gaza.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The United
States has worked vigorously and with determination
to support Palestinian statehood in the context
of a comprehensive peace agreement that would
permanently resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Since the attacks of 7 October, President Biden has
been clear in that sustainable peace in the region can
be achieved only through a two-State solution, with
Israel’s security guaranteed. There is no other path that
guarantees Israel’s security and future as a democratic
Jewish state. There is no other path that guarantees
that Palestinians can live in peace and with dignity in a
State of their own. And there is no other path that leads
to regional integration between Israel and all its Arab
neighbours, including Saudi Arabia.
We also have long been clear that premature actions
here in New York, even with the best intentions, will
not achieve statehood for the Palestinian people. As
members of the Security Council, we have a special
responsibility to ensure that our actions further the
cause of international peace and security and are
consistent with the requirements of the Charter of the
United Nations. As reflected in the report (S/2024/313)
of the Committee on the Admission of New Members,
there was not unanimity among Committee members as
to whether the applicant met the criteria for membership
as set forth in Article 4 of the Charter of the United
Nations. For example, there are unresolved questions
as to whether the applicant meets the criteria to be
considered a State.
We have long called on the Palestinian Authority
to undertake necessary reforms to help establish the
attributes of readiness for statehood, and we note
that Hamas — a terrorist organization — is currently
exerting power and influence in Gaza, an integral
part of the State envisioned in this draft resolution
(S/2024/312). For those reasons, the United States
voted against this draft Security Council resolution.
Again, the United States continues to strongly support
a two-State solution. This vote does not reflect
opposition to Palestinian statehood, but instead is an
acknowledgement that it will only come from direct
negotiations between the parties.
A central focus of United States policy prior to
the 7 October Hamas terrorist attacks was to promote
normalization between Israel and its Arab neighbours
and, as a critical element of a normalization package,
generate tangible benefits in a political horizon
for the Palestinian people. That was based on the
judgment of the United States that normalization is
the most viable pathway to make progress on what
had been an intractable situation between the Israelis
and the Palestinians. In the aftermath of 7 October,
conversations on potential normalization and a political
horizon for the Palestinians that would lead to statehood
and membership at the United Nations have continued.
Hamas and its Iranian backers would probably prefer
that that effort not succeed, but we are determined to
see it through. It remains the view of the United States
that the most expeditious path towards statehood for
the Palestinian people is through direct negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, with
the support of the United States and other partners.
We believe that that approach can tangibly advance
Palestinian goals in a meaningful and enduring way.
We also believe, in the light of Iran’s unprecedented
and outrageous actions over the past week, that Israel’s
neighbours would stand to benefit greatly from
normalization. The United States is committed to
intensifying its engagement — with the Palestinians and
the rest of the region — not only to address the current
crisis in Gaza, but to advance a political settlement
that will create a path to Palestinian statehood and
membership in the United Nations.
The United States will continue to oppose unilateral
measures that undermine the prospect of a two-State
solution. That includes any actions that violate the
principles that Secretary Blinken has emphasized for
months: that Gaza cannot be a platform for terrorism,
that there should be no Israeli re-occupation of Gaza
and that the size of Gaza’s territory should not be
reduced. As we have said before, we believe that a two-
State solution, coupled with those elements, is the best

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 5/13
way to achieve a durable peace in the region, along with
security for Israelis and Palestinians.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France would like to thank Algeria for
submitting this draft resolution (S/2024/312), which it
voted in favour of.
It is time to achieve a global political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis of the
two-State solution — the only option that can meet the
long-term security needs of Israel and the legitimate
aspirations of Palestinians for a State. As the President
of the Republic recalled, France is not shying away from
this issue. It is in that context that, upon the initiative
of Algeria, we are in favour of elevating the status of
Palestine in the United Nations and admitting it as a full
Member. That admission must allow for the resumption
of a decisive and irreversible process to implement
the two-State solution and the strengthening of the
Palestinian Authority in the Palestinian territories,
both in Gaza and in the West Bank. The Palestinian
Authority must be able to effectively and efficiently
exercise its responsibilities across all the territories of
a future Palestinian state.
The conflict in Gaza — triggered by the terrorist
attack by Hamas and other terrorist groups on
7 October, which we condemn in the strongest possible
terms — shows how essential it is for the Security
Council to unequivocally commit to a political
solution to the conflict, while also strengthening its
humanitarian action. We therefore continue to demand
an immediate and lasting ceasefire and the immediate
and unconditional release of all hostages.
Mrs. Rodrigues Birkett (Guyana): I wish to thank
the delegation of Algeria for putting forward the draft
resolution (S/2024/312) and for being fully transparent
from the very beginning about the approach it intended
to take.
Thirteen years after the last request (see S/PV.6624),
today another call for justice was made by the Palestinian
people. But the Council’s response was not enough to
deliver that justice. Guyana raised its hand for justice
today because, for us, it was the right choice, and it
was long overdue. The Palestinian question has been
before the Council since 1947. From that time, there
have been at least 792 formal meetings of the Council.
An examination of those meeting records provided
some key revelations about the Council’s approach to
the Palestinian question, three of which I will highlight
very briefly.
First, over those decades, Council members
have, inter alia, acknowledged the need to address
the various dimensions of the Palestinian question,
consistently stressed the need for the Palestinian
people to exercise their right to self-determination and
emphasized the need for the realization of the two-State
solution. However, while that shows that the Council
has largely been sympathetic to the Palestinian cause,
that sympathy has not generated enough political will
to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question.
That takes me to my second point. The Council’s
historic sympathy for the Palestinian people has led to
many band-aid measures to address these symptoms
of the Palestinian question. We have not been able
to comprehensively address the root cause of the
problem, namely, the lengthy delay in the creation of an
independent State of Palestine. The draft resolution we
voted on a moment ago was an important step towards
addressing that gap, and Guyana deeply regrets that
it was not adopted. Without getting to the root of the
problem, the symptoms will persist, and the reactive
cycle will continue. The people of Palestine deserve a
clear political horizon and a path to a comprehensive
and just peace.
The third issue is the serious lack of accountability
that has accompanied the Palestinian question from
1948 to the present day. If the occupying Power
were held to account for its continuous violations of
international law, the path to a free and independent
Palestine would have been cleared a long time ago. The
impunity must end.
Guyana supports the State of Palestine’s full
membership in the United Nations and believes that
it has met all the requirements set out in Article 4 of
the Charter of the United Nations, which are the only
ones to be taken into consideration for the admission
of a Member into the United Nations. We are therefore
deeply disappointed that the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people were not met today. Guyana
had hoped that the Council’s historic sympathy and
apparent empathy with the Palestinian cause could have
translated into strong political will this time around,
given the existential threat Palestinians currently face.
That notwithstanding, Guyana reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to continue working with the Council and

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
6/13 24-10590
the entire United Nations membership to secure justice
for the Palestinian people. To the Palestinian people, I
say that Guyana will never abandon it. We will continue
to use our voice until justice is served.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): Slovenia voted in favour
of the recommendation of the Security Council
for membership of the State of Palestine in the
United Nations.
The two-State solution, where two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace,
is the only long-term sustainable option. Slovenia
continues calling for full respect of international law
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. At this point,
we have two main objectives — addressing the current
situation in Gaza and resuming the political process
towards a two-State solution. We are of the view that
the membership of the State of Palestine in the United
Nations could significantly support that process, which
should address all outstanding issues, support the
State of Palestine and guarantee security for Israel.
Membership in the United Nations is not an alternative
to negotiations, but complementary to them. We believe
that the United Nations should play a crucial role in the
peace process. Both States should therefore have equal
status at the United Nations.
Slovenia is of the view that Palestine meets the
criteria set out by Article 4 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Granting United Nations membership to
Palestine could be an important step towards peace. It
would strengthen the role of the Palestinian Authority
and would contribute to the security of Israel, as well.
We maintain our view that Palestine’s right to self-
determination and United Nations membership are not
contrary to Israel’s right to exist and be secure. We
believe that any two-State solution must be built on
mutual recognition and sovereign equality.
Mr. Sangjin Kim (Republic of Korea): It was
1949 when the Republic of Korea first applied for
membership to the United Nations. However, it was
not until 1991 — 42 long years after its original
application — that the Republic of Korea was granted
United Nations membership. We therefore truly
understand what it means for people to aspire to be
admitted to this paramount international Organization.
The Republic of Korea believes that the only viable
and sustainable way to resolve the Palestinian question
and establish lasting peace is through the realization
of the two-State solution. Yet, for several decades,
negotiations between parties have been stalled. The
Republic of Korea voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2024/312, on the admission of Palestine into the United
Nations, in consideration of our view that renewed and
strengthened efforts are needed to revitalize the path
towards a two-State solution.
Regardless of today’s results on the draft resolution,
we hope that the parties will soon resume negotiations
on the basis of dialogue and compromise for a peaceful
resolution of the Palestinian question. For that to
happen, the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Gaza must end soon.
We once again call for an immediate ceasefire in
Gaza, the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages held by Hamas and other groups and expanded
humanitarian aid throughout Gaza. All regional actors
should exercise full restraint to avert further dangerous
escalation in the region.
Against that backdrop, even though today’s draft
resolution on the admission of Palestine was not
adopted, it is clear that all members of the Security
Council share the view that the two-State solution
imperative is the most viable long-term resolution to
the Palestinian question and the best way, more broadly,
to reduce long-standing regional tensions.
We note that our vote today does not constitute a
bilateral recognition of Palestine as a State. In future,
we will consider this matter at a time that is most
conducive to the resolution of the conflict. We also hope
that the negotiations between the parties can resume in
the near future.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom reiterates its commitment to
making progress towards a two-State solution in which
a safe and secure Israel lives alongside a sovereign,
viable Palestinian State.
We agree that the people of the West Bank and Gaza
must be given the political perspective of a credible
route to a Palestinian State and a new future, and it
needs to be irreversible. That is not entirely in our gift,
but our recognition of a Palestinian State should be part
of it. We believe that such recognition of Palestinian
statehood should not come at the start of a new process,
but it does not have to be at the very end of it. We must
start with fixing the immediate crisis in Gaza, which
is occupied Palestinian territory and must be part of a
future Palestinian State.

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 7/13
However, Hamas is still in control of parts of Gaza,
and Israeli hostages remain in captivity. That shows
that we are still at the start of the process. Ensuring that
Hamas is no longer in charge of Gaza and removing
the group’s capacity to launch attacks against Israel
are essential and unavoidable steps on the road to
lasting peace, as is working together to support the new
Palestinian Government as it takes much-needed steps
on reform and resumes governance in Gaza, as well as
the West Bank.
We abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2024/312 today because we must keep our focus first,
on securing an immediate pause in order to get aid in
and hostages out, and only then, on making progress
towards a sustainable ceasefire without a return to
destruction, fighting and loss of life.
Our Foreign Secretary is in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories this week to offer our support
towards advancing that plan. We will continue to work
urgently to help bring peace and galvanize a political
process towards a two-State solution that provides
justice and security for both Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Uemura (Japan): Last month the Security
Council was finally able to adopt resolution 2728 (2024),
which demands an immediate ceasefire in Gaza in the
hopes of bringing about a real change on the ground.
However, a ceasefire has not been realized and the
humanitarian catastrophe is deepening. The people of
Gaza are facing unprecedented tragedy and hardship.
Much of Gaza’s population lives in despair, with little
food and water and deprived of human dignity.
In the meantime, serious diplomatic efforts are
being made to bring about a cessation of hostilities
and the release of the hostages. We reiterate our strong
support for the crucial role of the United States, Egypt
and Qatar to that end and appreciate their tireless efforts.
Once a sustainable ceasefire is in place, the
formation of a reconstruction mechanism for Gaza,
with the support of the international community, and
the establishment of effective governance by a reformed
Palestinian Authority will be essential.
Japan has strongly upheld the Palestinian right to
self-determination and consistently supported a two-
State solution in which Israel and a future independent
Palestinian State can live side by side in peace and
security. For decades, we have provided robust support
for political, economic and social initiatives towards
Palestinian State-building.
Our principled position was reflected in our vote in
favour of the 2012 General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which granted Palestine the status of non-member
observer State at the United Nations and expressed
the hope that the Security Council would consider
favourably the application of Palestine for admission as
a full-fledged United Nations Member State.
This is the first time since 2011 that the Security
Council has deliberated on Palestinian membership in
the United Nations. The intervening years have been
marked by little progress in direct negotiations between
the parties, whereas most recently we have witnessed
escalating regional conflict, which has caused
untold suffering.
At this critical moment, Japan voted in favour of
today’s draft resolution S/2024/312 as a comprehensive
decision, recognizing that Palestine meets the criteria for
admission to membership in the United Nations, while
also taking into account the perspective of promoting
the establishment of a Palestinian State through
peaceful negotiations between the parties concerned.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland has abstained in the voting on draft
resolution S/2024/312. Without opposing it, we believe
that at present, that step is not conducive to easing
the situation and finding a peaceful solution, given
the great instability and the conflict on the ground.
We believe that it would be better to proceed with the
admission of Palestine to the United Nations as a full
Member at a time when such a step could be in line with
an emerging peace.
However, this abstention in no way alters
Switzerland’s firm support for the two-State solution.
We believe that only a negotiated solution in which two
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security, can lead to lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
We have just discussed in detail the catastrophic
situation in the Middle East. What is urgently needed
is the immediate implementation of Security Council
resolutions and a ceasefire. We must — and without
further delay, if we are to restore people’s prospect
of a peaceful future in which they can all live in
dignity — re-establish a political horizon for a
negotiated solution to the conflict.

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
8/13 24-10590
Switzerland stands ready to support efforts that
can rebuild hope for peace through a solution with two
democratic States, living side by side in peace, within
safe and recognized borders, based on the borders
of 1967, including with Gaza as an integral part of a
Palestinian State.
Mr. Fu Cong (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is a sad day. Owing to the veto by the United States,
the application of Palestine for full membership in the
United Nations has been rejected, and the decades-
long dream of the Palestinian people ruthlessly
dashed. China finds the decision by the United States
most disappointing.
An independent State of Palestine has been a long-
cherished dream of generations of Palestinian people.
Its full membership in the United Nations is a crucial
step in that historical direction and process. As early
as 2011, Palestine submitted an application. Owing to
some countries’ opposition, the Council’s action at that
time was put on hold. Thirteen years is long enough.
And yet, we still hear some complaints asserting that
there is not enough time, and there is no need to rush
to take action. Those claims are disingenuous. The
admission of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations is more urgent now than ever before.
The relevant countries’ premise that they are not
able to support Palestine’s membership in the United
Nations is on the grounds that the State of Palestine
does not have the capacity to govern. We do not agree
with that assessment. Over the past 13 years, the
situation in Palestine has changed in many ways, the
most fundamental of which has been the expansion of
settlements in the West Bank. Palestine’s survival space
as a State has been steadily squeezed, and the foundation
of the two-State solution has been continuously eroded.
The relevant countries have ignored that and adopted an
attitude of acquiescence or even connivance. And now
they are questioning Palestine’s capacity to govern.
That is gangster logic, which confuses right and wrong.
What is even more unacceptable is that some
countries are challenging Palestine’s eligibility for
membership in the United Nations under the Charter of
the United Nations, implying that there still remains a
question as to whether Palestine is peace-loving. Such
an allegation is outrageous and a step too far. For the
Palestinian people, who are suffering under occupation,
that is tantamount to rubbing salt in their wounds and
extremely insulting. If it is out of a political calculation
to oppose Palestine’s full membership in the United
Nations, it would be better to simply say so, instead of
making excuses to re-victimize the Palestinian people.
The establishment of an independent State is an
inalienable national right for the Palestinian people.
It cannot be subject to questioning or bargaining. The
relevant countries make direct negotiations between
Palestine and Israel a prerequisite, claiming that
Palestine’s membership in the United Nations can be
the result only of negotiations. That is putting the cart
before the horse. Israel’s rejection of the two-State
solution is exceedingly clear. Against that backdrop,
the admission of the State of Palestine as a full Member
of the United Nations would allow Palestine to enjoy
equal status with Israel and would help to create the
conditions for the resumption of negotiations between
the two sides. All countries that genuinely support
the two-State solution should not stand in the way of
Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations.
The wheel of history is rolling forward. The trend
of the times cannot be countered. We are convinced that
the day will come when the State of Palestine will enjoy
the same rights as other Member States of the United
Nations, that the two States of Palestine and Israel will
be able to live side by side in peace as neighbours,
with the two peoples, Palestinians or Israelis, living in
tranquillity and happiness. China will continue to make
unremitting efforts and play a constructive role for the
early realization of that day.
Mr. De La Gasca (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Historically, Ecuador has supported the Palestinian
people in their legitimate right to have a State free
from foreign occupation and has supported the
processes leading to their self-determination and full
independence, in accordance with the fundamental
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
On 24 December 2010, Ecuador recognized
Palestine as a free and independent State within
the 1967 borders. Subsequently, in 2012, Ecuador
co-sponsored and voted in favour of resolution 67/19
in which the General Assembly granted observer
State status to Palestine. And since 2014, Ecuador has
maintained an embassy in Ramallah, Palestine, and
Palestine maintains an embassy in Quito.
Today once again, the vote of Ecuador demonstrated
its commitment to the people of Palestine, reaffirming
its recognition from 14 years ago. My country hopes

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 9/13
that soon the conditions will be in place that will allow
the Council, unanimously, to recommend the admission
of Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique
commends the presidency of Malta for convening this
meeting to take action on historic draft resolution
S/2024/312, on the admission of the State of Palestine
to the United Nations. We extend our deep appreciation
to Algeria and the entire Group of Arab States for their
leadership in submitting this text to the Council.
On 12 August 1988, the Republic of Mozambique
formally recognized the State of Palestine as an
independent and sovereign State. We did so because
of our deep belief that peoples are born with the
inherent right to self-determination, independence
and sovereignty. That right is deeply anchored in the
Charter of the United Nations, in the principles and
norms of international law and in the natural law itself.
It is a right that does not depend on a plebiscite or
referendum or, for that matter, on the judgment of other
alien peoples or Governments. It is therefore on that
basis that we, Mozambique, as many other nations in
the world, were born and entered the concert of nations.
We were admitted into the United Nations family in
September 1975, after a protracted 10-year struggle
for liberation.
We wish to recall that, as of today, 18 April, 140
United Nations Member States have extended their
recognition to the State of Palestine. That quasi-
universal recognition is a testament that Palestine
fulfils the requirements of statehood, which include a
population, territory and Government and the capacity
to engage in relations with other States.
We consider that the conditions are ripe for
Palestine to be a full Member of the United Nations.
Under Article 4 of the Charter and on the basis of our
record since 1988, Palestine is clearly a peace-loving
nation. Throughout the years, it has demonstrated its
acceptance of the obligations contained in the Charter,
and it has shown the ability and willingness to carry out
those obligations.
We wish to state that Mozambique entertains
diplomatic relations with the State of Israel. That is the
foundation on which we embrace the vision of a two-
State solution, of two independent and sovereign States,
Israel and Palestine, both as full Members of the United
Nations, coexisting as good neighbours, living side by
side in peace and security, as prescribed by the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. In
particular, that is fully in line with resolution 242
(1967), which was unanimously adopted by the Council
on 22 November 1967.
Those are the reasons why Mozambique voted in
favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting, and we commend
the presidency of Malta for the manner in which it has
conducted the work of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members and the Security Council on the
important application for admission to membership of
the United Nations by the State of Palestine. I also thank
Algeria for submitting the draft resolution (S/2024/312)
and for their leadership in the Council regarding the
plight and aspirations of the Palestinian people.
In the high-level open debate on “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”
, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone this morning elaborated
on our position on the issue (see S/PV.9608) — that is,
in the context of the request for the admission of the
State of Palestine as a Member of the United Nations 13
years after Palestine’s application was first considered
by the Committee on the Admission of New Members.
Sierra Leone itself recognizes the basis for such a
request, which, in our view, is legitimate and could
create the pathway to a political horizon founded on the
principles of the two-State solution based on General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), which recommends an
independent Arab and an independent Jewish State in
line with Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Sierra Leone supported and voted in favour of the
draft resolution for the State of Palestine to be admitted
as a Member of the United Nations. Our support was in
line with, and within the context of, our consideration
of Article 4 of the Charter and the guidance provided by
the International Court of Justice on its advisory opinion
on the conditions of admission of a State to membership
in the United Nations, issued on 28 May 1948.
We regret that the draft resolution was not
adopted. We are of the firm view that membership
would have resonated with the principle of equality
of States as enshrined in the Charter and certainly
would have strengthened the two-State solution, with
an independent Arab State and an independent Jewish
State living side by side in peace, security and stability.

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
10/13 24-10590
The State of Palestine’s membership at the United
Nations may have been delayed, as often happens in
regrettable periods of injustice. But as the arc of the
moral universe, which may be long but bends towards
justice, the United Nations membership for the State of
Palestine cannot be denied.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): Again, on behalf
of the Group of Arab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and all peace-loving Member States, I am
deeply grateful to all those who voted in favour of
the draft resolution we submitted (S/2024/312). The
overwhelming support for the application of the State
of Palestine sends a crystal-clear message: the State
of Palestine deserves its rightful place among the
Members of the United Nations.
To those who were unable to support the admission
of the State of Palestine today, we really hope that
they will have to do so next time, when the Security
Council will reconsider the question of the admission
of Palestine again. Yes, we will return, stronger and
more vocal, and we will be backed by the overwhelming
majority of the General Assembly.
As President Abdelmadjid Tebboune of Algeria has
said, Algeria’s efforts will not cease until the State of
Palestine becomes a full Member of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
In voting today for the admission of Palestine as a
Member of the United Nations, Malta made a clear choice.
We voted in favour of the two-State solution. We have
voted in favour of an idea that has enjoyed the support
of the vast majority of the international community for
decades. United Nations membership is a necessary
step for the Palestinians to achieve equal footing with
the rest of the international community.
The request for United Nations membership comes
at a difficult juncture. The unprecedented turmoil that
has followed the Israel-Hamas war in Gaza is pushing
the Palestinian people to a hopeless precipice. Malta has
been unequivocal in that an immediate and permanent
ceasefire is necessary to allow the necessary space for
peace and to put a stop to further civilian suffering.
Concrete efforts must also be made to bolster the
Palestinian Authority towards governance over a
unified West Bank and Gaza Strip.
We deeply regret that, following today’s veto, that
legitimate aspiration has not been realized. However,
we must not lose sight of its validity. The realization
of the two-State solution, along with efforts to promote
sustainable solutions to the ongoing conflicts in the
region, remains the only realistic foundation for
sustainable peace and stability in the Middle East. It
is our collective responsibility to explore all possible
paths towards that just realization.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Our right to self-determination has never once been
subject to bargaining or negotiation. Our right to self-
determination is a natural right, a historic right, a legal
right, a right to live in our homeland, Palestine, as an
independent State that is free and sovereign.
Our right to self-determination is inalienable.
It is not tied to a time or a time frame. Our right is
eternal, permanent and continuous. It cannot be
delayed, it cannot be suspended, and it has no statute of
limitations. It is important that our right is not subject
to manipulation, domination or conditions, especially
by Israel, the occupying Power, the ethnic cleansing
Power, the genocidal Power, the colonial Power that is
determined to evict our people from their homeland, to
eliminate their identity, to replace their history and their
culture, to uproot their present and their civilization
and to besiege their future and their horizons.
The people of Palestine will not disappear. We will
not disappear. The people of Palestine are a historical
fact that cannot be erased, no matter how strong and
powerful the occupying Power is. The great Palestinian
people have remained on their land not because of
the charity or mercy of Israel but out of patience,
steadfastness, hope and sacrifice despite occupation,
oppression, enslavement and being besieged,
persecuted, displaced, evicted and seeking refuge.
We have repeatedly warned of Israel’s colonial
policy in our land, which it not only declares openly
but now boasts about. We have also warned of the
absence of a horizon for a solution. We have warned
of the dangers of ignoring the Palestinian question and
its centrality, of ignoring the growing suffering of the
Palestinian people. We have warned of the dangers
of claiming that a just peace is possible in our region

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 11/13
without a just, comprehensive and lasting resolution to
the Palestinian question.
We come to the Security Council today at
an important historic moment, regionally and
internationally, so that the Council would salvage
what can be saved. We place Council members before
a historic responsibility to establish the foundations
of a just and comprehensive peace in our region. They
have an opportunity to revive hope that has been lost
among our peoples. Members have the opportunity to
implement their commitment towards the two-State
solution along the 1967 borders by taking actual action,
firm action that cannot be manoeuvred or retracted.
The majority of the Security Council members
have risen to the level of this historic moment, and they
have stood on the side of justice, freedom and hope in
line with the ethical, humanitarian and legal principles
that must govern our world and in line with logic.
In that regard, we reiterate our sincere gratitude
to sisterly Algeria, to the Arab and Islamic groups, to
the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement and
to the Maltese presidency of the Council, a dedicated
presidency that has managed the proceedings of our
Council wisely and efficiently. We express our gratitude
to all those who supported the request for Palestinian
membership and all those who voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2024/312).
(spoke in English)
I was moved by all the statements by members,
those who voted in favour and even those who voted
differently, and by the passion contained in their
commitment and understanding of the pain and the
moment of the Palestinian people. I salute them in the
name of the Palestinian people and their leadership.
(spoke in Arabic)
We accepted the two-State solution along the
1967 borders as an international vision of peace.
Arab States had put forth the Arab Peace Initiative
to support that vision. We built our State with the
efforts of our daughters and sons and with the support
and trust of the international community, despite the
impediments and obstacles by Israel. We have engaged
in the peace process in a manner that would secure
our supreme national interests, and we have abided
by the foundations of a peaceful and legal settlement
to the conflict. The Palestinian leadership, under the
presidency of President Mahmoud Abbas, continues to
be committed to that peaceful track, and we reiterate
our call for an international peace conference to be
held under multilateral international sponsorship,
a conference that aims to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and achieve the independence of the State
of Palestine.
However the question remains: is there a true
partner for peace in Israel? Is there a partner in peace
with us in Israel? Israel insists, through its consecutive
Governments, on maintaining occupation, on murder,
on siege, on the eviction of people and on building
settlements. Those are all policies and practices that
run counter to the Charter and to the resolutions of
the United Nations and are aimed at achieving just
one objective — namely, to snuff out any hope of a
sovereign and viable Palestinian State.
Israel believes that the State of Palestine is a
permanent strategic threat to it and will do its best
to block the sovereignty of a Palestinian State and to
ensure that the Palestinian people are exiled, away
from their land, or remain under its occupation forever.
It is now up to the Council members to determine
who loves peace and who is the enemy of peace, who
wants to save innocent lives and who seeks to commit
genocide. Israel does not want a two-State solution. It
does not want a Palestinian State. That is Israel’s plot,
agreed to by the Knesset and openly declared by its
members and its representatives in the Council and
everywhere within and outside the United Nations.
That is the plot that Israeli politicians and Israeli
Government officials proclaim. Netanyahu boasted of
that plot as a political accomplishment in preventing “the
establishment of the State of Palestine”. He announced
it in his delusional map, which he exhibited before the
General Assembly last September (see A/78/PV.10) — a
map of an Israel that stretches from the river to the sea,
negating the existence of Palestine. That is the plot of
his extremist Government — to get rid of Palestine and
the Palestinians. That is delusional, but, regrettably, we
have seen how costly that delusion has been in terms of
innocent lives.
Does the Council know what Israel needs to carry
out that delusional plot, the plot to expel the people
and annex the land? All it needs is more time, more
immunity, more lives and more blood. What is the
international community going to do about it? What is
the Security Council going to do about it, given that

S/PV.9609 Admission of new members 18/04/2024
12/13 24-10590
it is responsible for maintaining international peace
and security?
(spoke in English)
What is the Council going to do about it? What is it
willing to do?
(spoke in Arabic)
Will it give Israel the time it needs to annex
Palestinian land? Will the Council give Israel the
immunity to expel and kill the people? Will it give
Israel weapons so that it can claim more lives? Will
the Council give Israel the veto power over our right
to exist on our own land and over the right of the State
of Palestine to be a full Member of the United Nations?
The membership of the State of Palestine in the United
Nations is not symbolic; rather, it is of the utmost
importance to the Palestinians and to the peoples of the
region at this critical juncture. It is a step that has been
awaited since 1947.
(spoke in English)
Some waited from 1949 until 1992. We have been
waiting since 1947, and we are in 2024.
(spoke in Arabic)
It is a necessary step towards redressing the
historical injustice done to the Palestinian people
since the partition decision, through the Nakba, to our
present day. It is a necessary step to restore faith in
international legitimacy and international law and in
this Organization and its Charter, as well as to restore
hope in the peaceful settlement of the conflict. It is
one embodiment of our right to self-determination. It
enshrines the legitimacy of the State of Palestine in a
manner that cannot be reneged upon by any party, to
protect and preserve the land of the State of Palestine
from being handed over like a gift or divided up like
leftovers, as has already happened.
The membership of the State of Palestine in the
United Nations is an investment in peace.
(spoke in English)
If the Council wants to invest in peace, admit us to
membership. It is an investment in peace.
(spoke in Arabic)
It is also a starting point for peace. Our full membership
in the United Nations does not diminish the rights
of any Member State, and neither does it threaten or
negate the membership of any other Member.
(spoke in English)
We just want to be equal to all other Members. We do
not want to replace anyone. We want to enter the club
as equals.
(spoke in Arabic)
The Council’s support for granting the State of
Palestine full membership places us on the path of hope.
(spoke in English)
It allows us not to lose hope, to keep hope alive.
(spoke in Arabic)
The failure to adopt the draft resolution will not break
our will, dissuade us or defeat our resolve. The State
of Palestine is inevitable. It exists. Some may see it as
far off, and we see it as imminent, and we are honest
about that.
We are the ones who endure oppression and
injustice, and we are the most aware of the goals of that
unjust occupation — because we are the ones living
it — and the most aware of the just solution, and we tell
the Council that the time for freedom is now.
(spoke in English)
It is the time for freedom. It is the time for a free Palestine.
(spoke in Arabic)
Remember that, after this meeting ends, there are
innocent people in Palestine who are paying with their
lives and the lives of their children the price of the
Israeli occupation’s arrogance — the price of double
standards, of the blind bias in favour of Israel and of
deferring justice, freedom and peace.
Our Palestinian people have endured all kinds of
unbearable abuse at the hands of the Israeli occupier. It
has now become clearer than ever before that this great
people have not given up and will not give up their right
to their land. Despite the horror of the tragedies, the
bitterness of loss and the magnitude of the destruction
and displacement, our Palestinian people have not
lost their humanity, as our Palestinian people are now
searching for the remnants of life, and there is no one
anywhere more eager to live a normal life than our
people in Gaza — Gaza the glorious, Gaza the great.
Rather, all our Palestinian people everywhere want and

18/04/2024 Admission of new members S/PV.9609
24-10590 13/13
cling to life, like all the peoples of the earth — a people
who yearn for freedom, a decent life and a peaceful
life. Our Palestinian people will not disappear or fade
away, and they have never been redundant. One way or
another, the Council must deal with our people fairly.
(spoke in English)
We will not disappear. We love life. We love to
live in freedom and dignity in our national homeland.
We will not disappear. Either the Council deals with
us with fairness and gives us our rights — or gives us
our rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I wish to begin by thanking
the United States and, particularly, President Biden,
for standing up for truth and morality in the face of
hypocrisy and politics.
I sat here mere hours ago describing why draft
resolution S/2024/312 is destructive. I explained how
the Palestinian Authority does not meet even the basic
criteria, that it has no authority over its territory and
that it is a terror-supporting entity. How can one say,
in seriousness, that the Palestinians are peace-loving?
How? The Palestinians are paying terrorists to slaughter
us. None of their leaders condemn terrorism nor the
7 October massacre. They call Hamas their brothers.
The Palestinian representative called Hamas his
brothers after the massacre. They do not even recognize
Israel’s right to exist as a Jewish State. Not even one
Palestinian leader will say that he recognizes Israel’s
right to exist as a Jewish State. Peace-loving indeed!
Hamas was not mentioned here today. That is not
a coincidence since the Palestinian representative here
does not represent Hamas. He does not represent at least
half of the Palestinian people. Yet, regardless of the
Palestinians’ failure to meet the necessary criteria for
United Nations membership, most Council members,
sadly, decided to reward Palestinian terror with a
Palestinian State. That is very sad because their vote
will only further embolden Palestinian rejectionism
and make peace almost impossible. Please remember
that the next time the Palestinians reject another peace
plan or refuse to even come to the negotiating table.
I have represented Israel at the United Nations
for over three years and have taken part in dozens of
meetings in the Council. Since the 7 October massacre,
I have been here on a near-weekly basis, sometimes
daily. I have repeated the same arguments in every
debate — I have plead and convinced, or at least tried to
convince. I have brought testimonies, presented photos
and shown video footage.
Nevertheless, the Council has refused to even
condemn. It has refused to listen; it has refused to act.
It has even refused to check the facts. Today I will
therefore not try to fix what is already broken. Speaking
to the Council is like speaking to a brick wall. I pray
that the day will come when the Council understands
the magnitude of the mistake that it is making here. I
pray that it will understand before it is too late.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
