Reference: C.N.298.2026.TREATIES-XVIII.10 (Depositary Notification)
ROME STATUTE OF THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
ROME, 17 JULY 1998
VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF): WITHDRAWAL1
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, acting in his capacity as depositary,
communicates the following:
The above action was effected on 24 July 2026, with:
(Translation) (Original: Spanish)
… Venezuela has always been committed to combating impunity for the most serious crimes
of international concern. As a result, it was among the first countries on the continent to ratify the Rome
Statute and has participated actively and constructively in all the efforts that led to the establishment
and development of the International Criminal Court system.
This firm stance is grounded in the 1999 Bolivarian Constitution, which enshrined the
obligation to investigate and punish serious human rights violations, as well as the non-applicability of
any statute of limitations to actions aimed at punishing crimes against humanity and war crimes.
However, in the time since the Rome Statute entered into force, Venezuela has been both a
witness to and a victim of the selectivity, politicization and weaponization of the International Criminal
Court.
In the first two decades since the establishment of the International Criminal Court, Venezuela
has witnessed the marked bias demonstrated by the Court, which has shown itself to be relentless in
cases involving developing countries, primarily those on the African continent.
In February 2018, the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court initiated a
preliminary examination of the situation in Venezuela, reflecting clear subjectivity and political
manipulation, indicating a double standard.
It is regrettable that, as part of a strategy of “lawfare”, the mechanisms of the International
Criminal Court are being exploited for political purposes in order to continue to persecute the
Venezuelan people.
Given these facts, we are convinced that the International Criminal Court has strayed from the
noble objectives that led to its establishment and has become yet another instrument that serves interests
unrelated to those of countries, their peoples and justice, and disregards the principles of the right to
self-determination and sovereignty, particularly in relation to the Global South. This has been proven.
________
1 Refer to depositary notification C.N.361.2000.TREATIES-11 of 7 June 2000
(Ratification: Venezuela).

(XVIII.10)- 2 -
For this reason, effective as of the time of writing, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
hereby withdraws from the Rome Statute and initiates its permanent withdrawal from the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with the provisions of article 127 of the Rome Statute…
***
The action shall take effect for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on 24 July 2027 in
accordance with article 127 (1) which reads as follows:
“A State Party may, by written notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, withdraw from this Statute. The withdrawal shall take effect one year after the date of
receipt of the notification, unless the notification specifies a later date.”
6 August 2026
