International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
21ST ASIA SECURITY SUMMIT
THE SHANGRI-LA DIALOGUE
SEVENTH PLENARY SESSION
RE-IMAGINING SOLUTIONS FOR GLOBAL PEACE AND
REGIONAL SECURITY
SUNDAY 2 JUNE 2024
DR BASTIAN GIEGERICH,
DIRECTOR-GENERAL AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE, IISS
DATO’ SERI MOHAMED KHALED BIN NORDIN,
MINISTER OF DEFENCE, MALAYSIA
DR NG ENG HEN,
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE, SINGAPORE
VOLODYMYR ZELENSKYY,
PRESIDENT, UKRAINE

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Okay, we have got a growing list of questions, so I will take a first group, and then we will have a round
of answers. And if we have time, we will take another one. And it is my pleasure to first ask a veteran
of the Shangri-La Dialogue, and the former Executive Director of IISS–Asia, Tim Huxley.
Dr Tim Huxley, Former Executive Director, IISS–Asia
Thank you very much, Bastian. My question is for Malaysia’s Defence Minister. Dato’ Seri Mohamed
Khaled, my question concerns emerging security challenges on the island of Borneo, where sovereignty
is divided between Malaysia, Indonesia and Brunei Darussalam. What do you see as the particular
challenges to the security of the Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak? How does your ministry and
the Malaysian Armed Forces view the implications, in particular, of Indonesia’s long-term strategic
programme to move its capital city to Nusantara in East Kalimantan?
Indonesia’s political and military centre of gravity is going to shift in the coming years, and I think
there is a question about how Malaysia will adjust to that new reality. Thank you very much.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Let me collect a few questions, and then we can answer them in a group so we get a few more views in.
May I next call on, from Thailand, Tida Yingcharoen.
Tidarat (Tida) Yingcharoen, Adviser to the Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of
Representatives, Thailand
Thank you. My question is to both ministers. How can we empower our region to contribute to global
peace and stability when at times there is not any among ourselves? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. I would like to next call on Aaron Connelly from the US. Aaron?
Aaron Connelly, Senior Fellow for Southeast Asian Politics and Foreign Policy, IISS–Asia
Thank you, Bastian. Dato’ Seri, I wanted to ask you about your comments about like-minded countries
forming small blocs, which you seem to regard as a sign of fragmentation and divisive moves that could
be a decisive blow to regional stability. I wonder, is there more that ASEAN [Association of Southeast
Asian Nations] can do to fill the gaps in the regional architecture that seem to lead countries to believe
that they need these small blocs, something that Malaysia in particular can do to raise the level of
ambition in the ADMM [ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting] or in ASEAN more generally, particularly
given your role as the permanent shepherd for ASEAN’s post-2025 vision? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much, Aaron. And we will take, from Myanmar, Nyein Thant Aung.
Nyein Nyein Thant Aung, Master’s candidate, Dublin City University
Thank you very much for giving me the floor. And thank you, Minister, for your excellent remarks. My
question is to both ministers about the defence-industry cooperation in the amended ASEAN member
status. So it is clear that there are various factors driving this necessity. And also there is also some call
for collaborative effort that resonate very strongly. However, the internal instability within member
states, especially the ongoing crisis in Myanmar, adds another layer of complexity, and it is growing in
the urgency of fostering robust cooperation. So in this context, how do you propose navigating the
intricate interplay between external geopolitical dynamic, internal conflict within member states, and

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
the imperative of strengthening defence-industry cooperation to safeguard the regional security and
autonomy? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. I will take two more in this round, from Vietnam, Bich Tran, please.
Dr Bich Tran, Postdoctoral Fellow, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy; Adjunct Fellow, Center
for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
Thank you, Dr Giegerich. So, my question is to both ministers, because the United States is committed
to enhance cooperation with ASEAN through the second ASEAN–US maritime exercise. So the first
one was in 2019, and Singapore hosted a watch centre for the exercise then. And this next year, 2025,
Malaysia will be the Chair of ASEAN. So I would like to ask both of you about your thoughts on how
this kind of exercise can contribute to regional maritime security. Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. And last in this round, but we will try to come back to get a few more in, from
Australia, Rory Medcalf, please.
Professor Rory Medcalf, Head, National Security College, Australian National University
Thank you. My question is to both ministers. You and other speakers at this Dialogue, including the
Chinese Defense Minister, have emphasised the overriding importance of stability to ensure the
prosperity and development of all countries in the region. The use of force against Taiwan would really
shatter this prosperity, with devastating humanitarian and economic consequences for all of Southeast
Asia and the wider region, and the world. Can you please share with us how you and other leaders
within ASEAN convey that concern to China?
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. Let us tackle those. And I propose, Minister from Malaysia, we will start with
you. Mohamed Khaled, please, if you can take on a few of those.
Dato’ Seri Mohamed Khaled bin Nordin, Minister of Defence, Malaysia
Thank you for all the questions. I try to answer it generally together. And maybe those that I do not
answer, I will leave it to my more senior colleague.
Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
Senior colleague.
Dato’ Seri Mohamed Khaled bin Nordin, Minister of Defence, Malaysia
Okay. But this one I think I have to answer, on the move by Indonesia, their capital to Nusantara. I
think yesterday, when Pak Prabowo spoke, he alluded to the fact that whatever issues all this while
that Indonesia has with Malaysia or even with Singapore, we are able to resolve it amicably. And we
see that we have matured in our relationship, and whatever issues or challenges that we will face in
future, we believe that we can overcome it.
But the move by Indonesia, their capital to Nusantara, to Malaysia, is actually an opportunity, because
it will allow both countries to benefit from the effect of the focus and development of that particular
area. And at the same time, for Malaysia, for whatever that we will focus on our defence, defence will
be a process that will be done naturally, not towards looking into the development of Nusantara or any
other place. So we do not see that as a threat.

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
I believe that when Indonesia has Nusantara as the capital, they will develop it, they will let it grow.
And I believe, surely, they will not see that the capital poses any threat to anybody, especially including
to Malaysia. So to us, it is more an opportunity. I am sure there will be spin-off from the relocation of
the capital to Nusantara. And with the close relationship, not only bilaterally, but also through ASEAN,
we will ensure that we will work more closely, or if there is any issues or challenges, we will have open
dialogue with them.
And this is what this Shangri-La Dialogue is all about. I think everybody was speaking about dialogue.
And most of the questions asked by the participants here today, most of the answers will be to have
dialogue. It also includes the question of Myanmar. I think we accept the fact that it is very, very
complex. For Myanmar, for us to find a solution, surely one of the most important factors is we want
to see, firstly, there are common grounds among all those in Myanmar, which is something that we are
still not able to see.
Most of the parties in Myanmar, if they have no common ground, it will be very difficult for ASEAN
or for anyone else to find a solution. But the point is, I think there is no other solution than having
dialogue. So that also includes for other pacts or groups by other countries, even if there are such
grouping. For ASEAN, like I have mentioned, the third approach that we need to look at is on the
complementary approach, where we should be open to have dialogue with such groups so that they
can be roped in into whatever that ASEAN aspires to support and to ensure that they contribute
towards ASEAN’s principle.
And for exercises, I think that is one way in which we establish our relationship, we strengthen our
partnership, and that will continue as far as ASEAN is concerned. I leave it now.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you, Minister.
Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
I think there were two broad topics to address, one on ASEAN and a second one on Taiwan. Question
from Mr Medcalf, what ASEAN does to give its views about Taiwan. On ASEAN, it is a good question.
What is ASEAN, if you think about it? And we talk about ASEAN’s centrality. Questions have been
asked about what ASEAN can do.
And I suppose the starting point is, what agency and what creature is this. Is ASEAN centrality by
virtue of its size? It is not. Combined, I think, we are a large population because we have some large
nations like Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam, but I think our combined GDP is, I think – it is a guess –
about US$3 trillion. Combined military expenditure, I do not think is comparable to any of large,
middle powers. So it is not by economic heft, neither military might.
So what basis is ASEAN centrality? That is an interesting question. I thought about this, and I thought
the best analogy is ASEAN is like the Hobbit in Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings. One ring to control them
all, because the others were not trusted to hold that ring and should not have held the ring. And I think
ASEAN needs to continue to play that role, and it can gain credibility, I think, by how it behaves.
And my distinguished colleague, Dato’ Seri Khaled, has given some examples. And it may be
surprising to you that Hobbits also quarrel among themselves. But I am quite proud to say that on
record, that we have settled many of the disputes peacefully. Let me cite some, of course, between
Malaysia and Indonesia, Sipadan, Litigan, for those of you who know these places. Also, between
Indonesia, in 2022, Indonesian Foreign Minister Retno stated that Indonesia had engaged in no less
than 17 rounds of maritime-boundary negotiations with Philippines, Malaysia, Palau and Vietnam.

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
And in 2022, they welcomed news that Indonesia and Vietnam had agreed to the EEZ [exclusive
economic zone] boundaries in the waters surrounding the Natuna Islands after 12 years of bilateral
negotiations. Yesterday at the ministerial lunch, we also cited what Australia’s agreement with Timor-
Leste is. So I think ASEAN and wider Asia, I think if you continue this example of settlement by
peaceful disputes, I think ASEAN gains credibility.
I think the ADMM that I cited in my speech is useful. We have the expert working groups, and this also
addresses the issue of military operations. It is the only security architecture that has 18 militaries
participating. There is a special feature of it called the expert working groups, where the militaries
exercise. And when Brunei hosted it, and this was some time ago, I admit, this was the only 18-nation
military exercise. They sailed from Brunei to Singapore. And this was the only exercise that all nations
had cross-deck.
In other words, you had Japanese troops, I think, landing on Chinese ships. Chinese ships landing on
US ships. We are not so bold, maybe not so unrealistic to hope that that will happen soon. But certainly,
it is an aspiration to resume that kind of exercise. And we will continue to do it. And as I said, a proof
of success is that other Plus countries, beyond the [ADMM-]Plus countries, they have also applied to
join as observer. I mentioned France, Canada, United Kingdom, which are already in, and the EU and
Germany have also applied.
Let me deal with what we advise China about Taiwan. China does not need any advice about Taiwan
from ASEAN. You just heard, before this session, Minister Dong Jun, he would have gone on for half
an hour about Taiwan if you had let him, so they do not need any advice. But let me give an anecdote.
Earlier this year in Munich Security Conference, the Foreign Minister Wang Yi was speaking as a
plenary speaker on his own. And I think in the Munich Security Conference, they are milder and quite
kind in their question time. And the first question that came out after his session is, ‘Foreign Minister
Wang Yi, will China invade Taiwan?’ And his answer was instructive. He is an accomplished diplomat,
so he was unfazed. And he said, in the Chinese constitution, there are three reasons for justified force
against Taiwan. So all ears pricked up.
First, if Taiwan declares independence. Second, if another country fights on behalf of Taiwan’s
independence. And third, if all peaceful means have been exhausted. I suggest that is a very useful
framework for us to keep the peace.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. I will take a few more questions, and we will have a second round of responses
to these. And I will start this round with Akita Hiroyuki from Japan, please.
Akita Hiroyuki, Foreign Affairs Commentator, Nikkei Asian Review
Thank you very much. I would like to ask a question that we have not discussed so much in this room.
That is about the possible second-term Trump administration in the US. I am sure that your mission is
to prepare for the unpredictable future. So my question is, how do you predict the most nightmare
scenario that – maybe there will be an optimistic scenario, but maybe for the sake of time, I would like
to ask, what is the most nightmare scenario that you are preparing for? And then secondly, what is the
specific countermeasures for you to adapt or mitigate such a risk? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
For the record, you did not reveal what your personal nightmare scenario is, so that gives us more than
one direction. Can I now call –

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
Dato’ Seri Mohamed Khaled bin Nordin, Minister of Defence, Malaysia
And who the question was directed at.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
I will ask next please, from Brunei, Hafiizh Hashim.
Dr Hafiizh Hashim, Assistant Lecturer, Academy of Brunei Studies, Universiti Brunei Darussalam
Thank you, Ministers. This question goes to both Ministers. How do you perceive that ASEAN can
approach to these new emerging security threats, such as those human securities? Given that there are
slight uncertainties surrounding ASEAN’s centrality on how each member understands what security
means. Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. And can I please have Peter Lee from Korea?
Dr Peter Lee, Research Fellow, Asan Institute for Policy Studies
Thank you. My question is to both Ministers. A few days ago, the governments of Australia, Korea,
Japan, the United States and others released a joint statement condemning North Korean transfers of
munitions and missiles to Russia for use in Ukraine. No government of Southeast Asia signed that. So
I am curious how your countries view this issue and what position you want to take. Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. And finally in this round, from the UK, Viraj Solanki.
Viraj Solanki, Research Fellow, South and Central Asian Defence, Strategy and Diplomacy, IISS
Thank you, Bastian. Just building on Dr Ng’s last point, do you think that the current regional dialogue
mechanisms, both multilaterally such as ASEAN or ADMM or ADMM-Plus, or minilateral groupings,
are effective enough to address the growing number of geopolitical challenges that we are currently
facing? Or do you think that changes could be made to make these groupings more effective in
addressing these issues? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. If we have time to take a few more, there are a few more on our list, so I might
be able to come back to you. But if I may turn to the Ministers again for responses to those four points.
Minister Ng, can I start this round with you? Is that okay?
Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
It is very unusual – no country predicates a foreign policy on a certain political outcome of another. We
are all adults, and you have to work with administrations. And on record, and I agree with Bastian, I
do not know what nightmarish scenario you are talking about. Maybe you might reveal to us what
your nightmares are.
But when President Trump was president, we signed, extended our MoU [memorandum of
understanding] with the US with Prime Minister Lee in New York, which gave us an extension to the
US for, I think, another 15 or 20 years to rotate through our bases and Changi Naval Base and air bases.
So we will work with any administration of any country if we can find common ground. I will try to
understand what you mean and then reply with an anecdote.
Boris Pistorius, the German Defence Minister, was asked this same question, but not in the nightmarish
terms that you use, at the Munich Security Dialogue. The question posed to him was, how should

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
Europe prepare for if President Trump was elected? And his answer was a good one. He said Europe’s
preparations cannot depend on the outcome of the US elections. ‘We have to be prepared on ourselves,
Europe, to defend itself.’
So I would say, yes, countries will have to base on their own interests, and we will work with either
administration.
For newly emerging threats, I think we are engaged with some of these. We are involved with the
Netherlands and Korea in trying to push their initiatives toward AI [artificial intelligence]. And I
applaud what the Netherlands and Korea are doing, trying to gain a leadership role, a global role, to
try to have a framework in which AI is being used for military use. That is just an example.
Mr Zelenskyy asks, is the present architecture adequate? I think it is. If you compare it, for example,
with NATO – all of us are excited about when President Zelenskyy will come. But if you look at NATO,
it was in a historic time against a common threat. ASEAN did not have that. And I would congratulate
the originators who started that. And Senior Minister Teo was involved in the Singapore side in
constructing it to include 18 nations.
So I think it is adequate. If more countries want to join, I think we will consider it, observe us first. But
the answer is yes. Dato’?
Dato’ Seri Mohamed Khaled bin Nordin, Minister of Defence, Malaysia
Thank you. I think the question on Trump and all this, I think I would like to answer it by saying that
whatever it is, if you can see that ASEAN has made an impact. Whatever the situation, whatever the
challenges, I believe that ASEAN will continue to be there, and all the countries within this region,
through ASEAN, we will work collectively with or without Trump.
And also on the issues of the emerging threats and all those things, imagine there is no ASEAN. So I
believe that most of the answer is that we are fortunate we have ASEAN. And because of ASEAN, we
are also fortunate that this region, we are still peaceful, stable. There is no conflict within this region.
So actually, we have to see and ensure that ASEAN is still present, strong, stable, and members are
cohesive among each other. Thank you very much.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much for those questions and the answers that have been provided on these important
themes of regional stability.
Ukraine is in a battle for national survival, defending itself against Russian aggression. Upon arriving
in Singapore yesterday, President Zelenskyy said, and I might quote him here, ‘Global security is
impossible when the world’s largest country disregards recognised borders, international law and the
UN Charter, resorts to hunger, darkness and nuclear blackmail. Restoring just peace for Ukraine and
ensuring global food and nuclear security will be the aim of the Global Peace Summit in Switzerland.
And this is why the Asia-Pacific voice must be heard there.’ This is what he said. And we are delighted
that President Zelenskyy has chosen to address the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue. President Zelenskyy.
[PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY’S ADDRESS]
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Mr President, thank you so much for that address to the 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue. We will have
time for a few questions. And I want to start off, if I may, because you spoke about the path towards

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
ending the war and you spoke about the Global Peace Summit that is obviously a few weeks away now.
What is the one thing, the most important thing you need at this stage from the international
community as you pursue that path towards ending the war?
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
Thank you. Thank you once again for the invitation and for this question. I believe that as of today, the
main thing is that the civilised world has already done this main thing, it did not allow for the seizure
of Ukraine. Alongside with our warriors, with our people, you know that in the first days and weeks
and months of the war, it was very difficult. It was simply very difficult. And the resilience of our
nation, this resilience has provided strength to our warriors.
And the united world ensured that Ukraine is not alone against the aggressor that violates international
law. The issue is not with the name of the country. The question is not about naming the aggressor that
now leads the Russian Federation, the issue is about principles – the principles of respect to human life,
to freedom, to the freedom of speech, to the will to choose one’s own life and to have the right to live.
And it seems to me that all this was violated by one single person, Putin. And it is of utmost importance
that in the most difficult moment, the world, as it could, somebody more, somebody less, somebody
with weapons, somebody diplomatically, someone does not have weapons, to help in a humanitarian
way. And that somebody is a very small country that has no budget. And they were given the very last
money they had simply to demonstrate that they are on the right side, that they are on the side of truth.
And it seems to me that is the most important thing that the world has done.
Now Russia is trying to disrupt the Peace Summit, and that is true. That is true. We have, as of now,
the confirmation from 106 countries of the world and on the senior level of higher representatives, on
the level of leaders, 106 countries. And what is Russia doing? It is the country of war. And it is now
travelling around many countries in the world, threatening them with the blockade of the agricultural
goods, of the food products, of chemical products. It is threatening to damp the prices for the energy.
And it is simply pushing the other countries of the world so that they are not present at the summit.
This issue is not even about weaponry support. This is about the support of the very end of the war,
and it is disrupting it, and it is doing it in all regions. And now there is some not good information that
certain states have started to assist it in diplomatic disruption of the Peace Summit. And therefore,
when you are asking what the world can do, the world has to be resilient. It has to be strong, it has to
put pressure on Russia. There is no other way to stop Putin. Only diplomatic isolation, strong Ukrainian
military, and for all the countries of the world to not balance between Ukraine and Russia, but defend
international justice and law.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. We have time to take a few questions from the floor. We will take them one by
one. So I can already say we will not get through all the list that we have here on my screen. But I want
to give President Zelenskyy a chance to answer each question that is posed to him. And I will start with
a question from the region here, from Cambodia, Neth Chanthima, please.
Dr Neth Chanthima, Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Cambodia
Thank you for the floor. President Zelenskyy, you remarked before that Israel’s right to defence is
indisputable as the right to self-defence is codified under the UN Charter. Meanwhile, you and your
Western allies have also repeatedly referred to the rule of law when conducting relations and
responding to hostilities internally and in the international community. As such, do you not think there
should be a collective call from yourself and your allies to call upon the Israeli government to adhere
to international humanitarian law? Namely the principle of proportionality, the distinction between

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
combatants and civilians, and the prohibition of inflicting unnecessary suffering on the civilian
Palestinian population. Thank you.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
Thank you so much. First and foremost, how to counter any narratives and disinformation, to look into
each fact separately, look into details, and to see the truth. You can ask the question, as you have now
posed, and to join all the questions to unite the attacks of Hamas against Israel and then the pressure
of Israel to Gaza. Or you can look into details.
Ukraine is a just country that respects international law and the UN Charter. Ukraine has said if
terrorists from Hamas – and this was in the first days of the terrorist attack against Israel – if terrorists
of Hamas attack civilians, Israel has the right to defend. So let us not mix everything to one issue. And
then afterwards, Ukraine has said when Israel was in the territory of Gaza and there was a
humanitarian crisis, Ukraine said, firstly, we are ready to help humanitarianly to Gaza. Secondly, you
need to respect international laws. Thirdly, Ukraine recognises two states, Israel and Palestine, and it
will do everything for Israel to stop, to end this conflict so that civilians do not suffer.
So please do not mix the two periods into one. Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. I will next ask the Executive Chairman of the IISS from the UK, Sir John
Chipman.
Sir John Chipman, Executive Chairman, IISS, UK
Mr President, one of the principles of international law is that if one country illegally invades another
country, they are liable to pay compensation and reparations for the loss of property and persons.
When, after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, the war ended with Saddam Hussein retreating to Baghdad,
a UN compensation committee did disperse elements of Iraq’s state assets to compensate Kuwait. There
is a legal argument that Russia’s state assets could similarly be used. Will this issue be discussed at your
peace conference?
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
The question of justice, of which the frozen assets is part of and compensation is part of everything that
Russia has brought to Ukrainian territory, we can discuss this, but this issue will not be in our
communiqué because there will be three issues on this summit: food security, nuclear security and
getting back stolen Ukrainian children. These are three main issues.
Undoubtedly, the question regarding frozen assets is being discussed permanently by our partners. Of
course, Russia has to feel that this war is of high price, but not only to ask for European continent and
for Africa or Asia because of the blockade of the Black Sea and food products, but because they are the
aggressor. And for this, we need to have an opportunity – we need to be given the opportunity, this
will be right to say, that we are being given an opportunity for a certain mechanism to use frozen assets.
Now, only in Europe there are around US$300 billion of such assets. This will not be enough to
compensate for everything that Russia has done in Ukraine. But if the frozen assets will be not only
frozen in the EU, but will be used in Ukraine, then the immediate circle next to Putin and Putin himself,
they will feel that this war is expensive to them.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
Thank you very much. We have a very long list, but we are running out of time. So I will ask for one
more question that I will ask President Zelenskyy to address. And I’ll give the floor to Veerle Nouwens,
please.
Veerle Nouwens, Executive Director, IISS–Asia
Thank you, Bastian. President Zelenskyy, with a view to the Global Peace Summit to be convened in
Switzerland in two weeks’ time, what would you hope for from countries in this region? And perhaps
to Minister Ng, how might Singapore be able to support this process? Thank you.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much, Veerle. If I may ask President Zelenskyy to address that question, then I will
give the word to Minister Ng to speak for the host nation. Mr President?
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
Firstly, it is a great pleasure for me to be in Singapore, and I am very pleased that me and my team
were invited today. I will have the meeting with the President and Prime Minister of Singapore. We
will discuss, in details, our bilateral relations. But the most important thing, I would really want the
leader of Singapore to support Ukraine with his personal participation in the Peace Summit.
And the same goes about the countries in the region. We truly count that you will support this summit
and you will be present in Switzerland. We have on the agenda three points. But yet again, I underscore,
we are very open, normal people. And this was previously discussed with the Swiss side. We are ready
to hear various proposals and thoughts that lead us not to continuation of the war, this is important,
but to the end of it, and to sustainable and just peace for Ukraine.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Has Singapore decided how it will be involved in this process?
Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
First, let me just thank President Zelenskyy for being here, express my personal admiration. This is not
your first address to Shangri-La Dialogue. If all of us remember, two years ago, you addressed us. We
were here, but we were not sure where you were. And it was a particularly dark period because we
were coming out of COVID. And I would say that all the audience here listened with rapt attention.
And we knew that we were part of history in the making, and deep admiration for your leadership as
well as the resilience of the people in Ukraine. So, sir, you have our admiration, and thank you for your
leadership.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
Thank you so much.
Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
Singapore strongly supports the Ukraine position in principle and in practice. If you remember, the
invasion was in February 2022, who can forget, 24 February. Very soon after, I think four days after,
Singapore’s Foreign Affairs Minister put out a statement, on behalf of the Singapore government,
wholly condemning the Russian invasion of Ukraine. And unilaterally, we began sanctions against
Russian banks and other entities that we thought could facilitate or aid in the conduct of war of Russia
against Ukraine.
We co-sponsored a UNGA [United Nations General Assembly] resolution condemning the invasion
and asking for the immediate withdrawal of Russian troops. We sent some aid, and I have been in

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
contact with your defence ministers. We sent some ambulances, which I am glad you have received,
military ambulances. But we stand with you. And I think your appearance in this Shangri-La Dialogue,
President Zelenskyy, is the epitome of what we are all hoping for: rules-based order, one which
guarantees the security and survival of large nations and small.
And I think I speak on behalf of us that we hope that your struggles will continue to bear victory, and
we hope that significant progress and we wish for your personal safety and well-being to people of
Ukraine. Thank you very much.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President, Ukraine
Thank you very much.
Dr Bastian Giegerich, Director-General and Chief Executive, IISS
Thank you very much. President Zelenskyy, let me thank you on behalf of the IISS for speaking to the
IISS Shangri-La Dialogue and answering questions from the delegates. Your mission is clear and of
vital importance for your country, but, as you have explained, also for global peace and questions that
touch all of us, including in this region.
I hope you will receive the diplomatic engagement you called for, and, indeed, that the voices of the
Asia-Pacific region are heard and contribute to the aims of the Global Peace Summit in Switzerland.
We have now reached the conclusion of the Shangri-La Dialogue. And I want to just very briefly thank
the team that Veerle Nouwens has led here at the IISS–Asia office. Her team has worked tirelessly on
the many challenges, logistical, content-wise, that an undertaking like this creates. Staff from our offices
in London, Berlin, Manama, Washington have deployed to Singapore in support of this effort to make
sure that we convene in a setting that includes wide international participation and runs seamlessly for
all of us.
We had here some 581 full delegates. We batched in some 3,000 people altogether. The IISS facilitated
some 91 bilaterals. We know there were many more because, obviously, nations make their own
arrangements. We had 55 nationalities here, 50 government delegations, and then three international
organisations.
On top of that, in terms of outreach, before we started the session, we had already, on social media,
reached some 48 million people around the world. I dare to say this will be more now. We have over
350 media representatives here from around the world. It is, of course, also my honour to thank the
staff of the Prime Minister’s Office here in Singapore, the Ministry of Defence of Singapore, the Minister
himself, of course, the Permanent Secretary who I have seen here in the room before, and his team, and,
of course, also the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the police and the many security officials who have kept
us safe and were involved here.
This was my first Shangri-La Dialogue as Director-General and Chief Executive of the IISS. I dare say
that I am looking forward to the next one, which will be at the end of May, early June in 2025. Of course,
the IISS never stands still in the pursuit of defence-diplomatic engagement. And I am delighted to
announce that some two weeks ago, we signed an agreement with the government of the Czech
Republic to organise and run the Prague Defence Summit that will focus on the defence-capacity and
defence-capability challenges that need to be tackled to defend Europe.
And I would like to acknowledge Daniel Blažkovec, the Deputy Minister of Defence of the Czech
Republic, who has participated in the Shangri-La Dialogue this year, and we are looking forward to

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) The 21st IISS Shangri-La Dialogue
As Delivered
working with his government. And I hope to see some of you in Prague from 8–10 November this year
for the first edition of that Prague Summit.
And with that, I shall close. And I invite you now to have lunch. I wish you a safe journey. If I can just
ask the audience to remain in their seats for 20 seconds while President Zelenskyy and the other
speakers take their leave. Thank you very much. Have a good day.
