Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9442
Security Council
Seventy-eighth year
9442nd meeting
Wednesday, 18 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. França Danese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Brazil)
Members: Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hoxha
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pérez Loose
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Biang
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Agyeman
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ishikane
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Nusseibeh
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
23-31062 (E)
*2331062*

S/PV.9442 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 18/10/2023
2/10 23-31062
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/773, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Brazil.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
submitted amendments (S/2023/775 and S/2023/776) to
the text of the draft resolution.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): During consultations on 16 October, many
Security Council members tried to dissuade us from
calling for a vote on our depoliticized humanitarian
draft resolution. We were asked to wait 24 hours so that
members could submit a “consensus” draft resolution.
We did not agree with that. And we were right, because
in the end, after almost two days, today’s voting will
be on a draft resolution that is only slightly, but very
questionably, changed and was not even discussed with
Council members. We regret that in the end the Council
wasted another precious 36 hours, during which time the
death toll increased: the strike on the hospital in Gaza
yesterday evening killed hundreds of civilians. Against
that background, inaction by the Security Council
looks appalling. We warned colleagues yesterday that
we simply could not waste any time.
I will speak frankly, since the time for diplomatic
metaphors has obviously long passed. Everyone who
did not support our humanitarian draft resolution
calling for an immediate ceasefire (S/2023/772) must
understand that they bear some of the responsibility
for what happened in Gaza. Brazil’s draft resolution
(S/2023/773), unfortunately, will not help to avert a
repetition of that tragedy. It includes no direct call for
a ceasefire — which is the most important element
for de-escalating the situation on the ground. It is
very important wording, which has been replaced by
a call for humanitarian pauses, which are also limited
solely to ensuring unhindered humanitarian access for
United Nations agencies. But that is not the same thing.
Humanitarian pauses will not help stop the bloodshed.
Only a ceasefire can do that.
In addition, the draft resolution still contains a
number of political elements that, while condemning one
side, do not send the proper incentive signals to the other
regarding the absolute inadmissibility of deadly attacks
on civilians and civilian objects in the Gaza Strip. The
importance of that now, I think, is absolutely crystal
clear to everyone.
We have therefore proposed two amendments to
address those shortcomings. The first (S/2023/775)
introduces a new operative paragraph unequivocally
condemning indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population and civilian objects in the Gaza Strip,
including yesterday’s missile attack on the Al Ahli
Hospital, as well as strongly condemning the blockade.
The second amendment (S/2023/776) adds a new
paragraph to the operative part of the draft resolution,
calling for an immediate, sustainable and respected
humanitarian ceasefire.
If the amendments we have proposed are not included
in the text of the draft resolution, it would not contribute
to correcting the catastrophic humanitarian situation
in Gaza. On the contrary, it would only deepen the
divisions among members of the Security Council and
polarize the positions of members of the international
community. We urge the members of the Council to
vote in favour of the amendments proposed by Russia.
The President: Members of the Council have before
them proposed amendments, submitted by the Russian
Federation, to the text of the draft resolution contained in
document S/2023/773, submitted by Brazil.
Rule 36 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure states the following:
“If two or more amendments to a motion or
draft resolution are proposed, the President shall
rule on the order in which they are to be voted upon.
Ordinarily, the Security Council shall first vote on
the amendment furthest removed in substance from
the original proposal and then on the amendment
next furthest removed until all amendments have
been put to the vote, but when an amendment adds
to or deletes from the text of a motion or draft
resolution, that amendment shall be voted on first.”

18/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9442
23-31062 3/10
Accordingly, I intend to put the proposed
amendments to the vote first.
I shall now put to the vote the proposed amendment
to be inserted after operative paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution. The amendment is contained in document
S/2023/775.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Gabon, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Japan, Malta,
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The President: The amendment received 6 votes
in favour, 1 against and 8 abstentions. The proposed
amendment has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
I shall now put to the vote the proposed amendment
to be inserted before operative paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution. The amendment is contained in document
S/2023/776.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Gabon, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Japan, Malta,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
The President: The amendment received 7 votes
in favour, 1 against and 7 abstentions. The proposed
amendment has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The voting on the amendment contained in
document S/2023/776, to be inserted before operative
paragraph 1 of draft resolution S/2023/773, on an
immediate ceasefire, and on the amendment contained
in S/2023/775, to be inserted after operative paragraph 2
of draft resolution S/2023/773, on a condemnation of the
attacks against civilians, which were proposed by Russia,
has made everything crystal clear. The delegations that
either abstained in the voting or voted against those
amendments were essentially against the cessation of
the bloodshed in the Middle East. There can be no other
explanation. Of course, colleagues in this Chamber will
use formal excuses, such as claiming that the language
of the amendments were not balanced, but those will all
sound pathetic — it is as simple as that.
Those colleagues have made their choice, and they
will have to bear responsibility for that choice before the
citizens of their countries, as well as of the countries in
the region and the millions of civilians who are living
under that deadly threat.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2023/773, submitted
by Brazil.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland,
United Arab Emirates
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The President: The draft resolution received 12
votes in favour, 1 against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Brazil.
At last Friday’s closed consultations, Council
members asked for Brazil’s leadership in its capacity
as President of the Council for the month of October
to facilitate a Council response to the escalating crisis
in Israel and Palestine, in particular its humanitarian
aspects. We heeded the call with a sense of urgency and
responsibility. In our view, the Council had to take action

S/PV.9442 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 18/10/2023
4/10 23-31062
and do so very quickly. Council paralysis in the face of
a humanitarian catastrophe is not in the interest of the
international community.
Therefore, throughout the past weekend and the
following days, we worked very hard through extensive
and collaborative engagement with Council members
to help build a unified position. While making a good
faith effort to accommodate different — sometimes
opposing — positions, our focus was and remains on the
critical humanitarian situation on the ground. Political
realism guided us, but our sight was always set on the
humanitarian imperative. Exactly as with other very
sensitive items on the Council’s agenda in which Brazil
had a special role to play, international humanitarian
law and human rights law provided a clear framework
for action.
Our proposed draft resolution (S/2023/773)
unequivocally condemned all forms of violence against
civilians, including the heinous acts of terrorism by
Hamas and the taking of hostages. It called for their
immediate and unconditional release. It also called on
all parties to strictly abide by their international legal
obligations, in particular those relating to the protection
of civilians, civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
personnel. The draft resolution also stressed the urgent
need for humanitarian access to civilians. The text
incorporated urgent and multiple calls by the United
Nations and many other actors for humanitarian pauses
to allow for the delivery of aid and the voluntary safe
passage of civilians. It encouraged the establishment
of humanitarian corridors and other mechanisms to
facilitate the smooth delivery of aid. The draft further
reflected the ethical necessity to provide civilians in
Gaza with electricity, water, fuel, food and medical
supplies and the necessity to be protected from forced
relocation when the prevailing conditions on the ground
do not ensure a safe and secure displacement. Thus,
faced with heinous terrorist acts against Israeli civilians,
the forceful reaction to such acts and an ever-growing
humanitarian disaster imposed on Gaza, the Council
response we proposed was robust and balanced.
We are grateful to all Council members who have
engaged with us since Friday and demonstrated a sincere
and practical commitment to multilateralism.
Very sadly, the Council was yet again unable to
adopt a resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Again, silence and inaction prevailed in no one’s true
long-term interest.
While we deeply regret that collective action is made
impossible in the Security Council, we do hope that
efforts by other actors will yield positive results. They
must be prompt, effective and substantial. Hundreds of
thousands of civilians in Gaza cannot wait any longer.
Actually, they have waited for far too long to no avail.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We have just witnessed yet another
demonstration of the hypocrisy and double standards
of our American colleagues. While not opposing in
principle the idea of adopting a humanitarian resolution
in the Security Council, they were not genuinely
interested in it and simply hoped to put enough pressure
on Council members to have the draft resolution collapse
without needing to veto it. As their attempt failed, they
had to take their masks off before us today.
I am not going to waste Council members’ time by
belabouring this point. I think what has happened is
crystal clear. However, I would like to refer to what the
head of Lockheed Martin, James Taiclet, said yesterday
when speaking with the American media.
“It makes no sense to restrain Israel from military
action. What is the point? The point is that we need
to further develop our military industrial complex,
which should account for more than 2 per cent of our
gross domestic product. There are conflicts that need
to be resolved with weapons, and we are prepared to
provide those weapons.”
We have no comment. That is the very essence of
the United States policy — from the Middle East region
to Ukraine and the Asia-Pacific region. We hope that,
after today’s vote, our international partners will have no
illusions about that.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As we meet, President Biden is in the region.
His trip is a clear demonstration of the fact that the
United States is actively engaging at the highest levels
to secure the release of hostages, to prevent the conflict
from spreading, to stress the need to protect civilian lives,
to address the humanitarian crisis facing Palestinians in
Gaza and to demonstrate to the Israeli people that the
United States stands with them in their time of sorrow
and need.

18/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9442
23-31062 5/10
We are on the ground doing the hard work of
diplomacy. While we recognize Brazil’s desire to move
forward draft resolution S/2023/773, we believe we need
to let that diplomacy play out, especially when Secretary-
General Guterres, President Biden, Secretary Blinken
and regional actors are engaged in intensive dialogue on
the very issues we are deliberating on today.
Yes, resolutions are important, and yes, the Council
must speak out. But the actions we take must be informed
by the facts on the ground and support direct diplomacy
efforts that can save lives. The Council needs to get
this right.
The United States is disappointed that this draft
resolution made no mention of Israel’s right of self-
defence. Like every nation in the world, Israel has the
inherent right of self-defence, as reflected in Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations, Following
previous terrorist attacks by groups such as Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the Council
reaffirmed that right. This text should have done the
same. Though we could not support this draft resolution,
we will continue to work closely with all Council
members on this pressing issue, just as we will continue
to reiterate the need to protect civilians, including
members of the media, humanitarian workers and United
Nations officials.
When I talk about the protection of civilians, I
mean all civilians. The United States is horrified and
saddened by yesterday’s explosion at the Al Ahli Arab
Hospital in Gaza. We mourn this tragic loss of life. On
the humanitarian front, we are working with Israel, its
neighbours, the United Nations and other partners to
address the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. It is critical that
food, medicine, water and fuel begin flowing into Gaza
as soon as possible. Families, the elderly and children are
in dire need.
Let us be clear. Hamas’s own actions have brought
on this severe humanitarian crisis. Hamas has caused so
much needless suffering, death and destruction. Every
Member State should condemn Hamas’s terrorism and
cruelty and every Member State should call on Hamas to
cease its endless barrage of rockets against Israel. That
is not complicated, and it is not controversial. It is the
bare minimum.
At this difficult moment, let us all call for the protection
of civilians and unequivocally condemn Hamas. Let us
all affirm Israel’s right of self-defence and support the
urgent diplomatic efforts under way. Let us stand with
the United Nations and other partners as they work to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis facing Palestinians in
Gaza. And let us all support equal measures of justice
and freedom for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2023/773, submitted by Brazil. Malta has
also abstained on the two amendments proposed by the
Russian Federation, contained in documents S/2023/775
and S/2023/776. Although we have no issue with the
substance, we saw no reason to alter a well-crafted
resolution that rests on a delicate balance and that sought
Council unity on this critical matter. We deeply regret
that the draft resolution was not adopted and remain
gravely concerned about the highly volatile situation
in Israel and Gaza. Notwithstanding that decision, the
Council must critically remain seized with the matter and
strive to work towards constructive steps that prioritize
the protection of civilians and prevent any potential
regional conflagration.
Within that context, Malta unequivocally condemns
in the strongest possible terms the barbaric terrorist
acts perpetrated by Hamas on Israeli soil and against
the people of Israel. Malta emphasizes that Israel has
the right to self-defence in the face of such violence and
indiscriminate attacks. It has the right and obligation
to protect its territory and its people in line with
humanitarian and international law and the principles
of distinction and proportionality. We also reiterate our
call on Hamas to unconditionally and safely release the
hostages immediately.
We deeply regret that the casualties of this war have
already included numerous medical, humanitarian and
United Nations staff. Hundreds were killed in yesterday’s
horrific strike on the Al Ahli Baptist Hospital in Gaza,
which was sheltering thousands of displaced. Such actions
are deplorable. They are a blunt breach of international
law, which categorically prohibits endangering civilians,
medical staff and humanitarian establishments.
This is the inevitable result of the military operations
that are being conducted in Gaza, one of the most densely
populated places on Earth. Decisions to cut off electricity,
water supply and refuse supplies of aid and fuel are also
deeply concerning and are leading to catastrophic results.
The evacuation order, which displaced over 1 million
people to south Gaza, has had serious humanitarian
consequences. Such decisions are inconsistent with
international humanitarian law and must be rescinded.
Malta also stresses the crucial importance that there
be rapid and unhindered humanitarian access to Gaza

S/PV.9442 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 18/10/2023
6/10 23-31062
and urges the immediate establishment of humanitarian
corridors in that regard.
At this juncture, the importance of preventing a
regional spillover is critical. It is therefore imperative
for all parties to exercise maximum restraint and fully
comply with the norms of international law. Our efforts,
moving forward, must be steadfast in aligning with a just
and comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
night before last, I already gave a comprehensive account
of China’s views on the current situation in Palestine
and Israel. In the upcoming emergency meeting, I shall
elaborate on China’s position.
I will now focus on China’s position on today’s vote
and the fact that draft resolution S/2023/773 failed to be
adopted. We are shocked and disappointed.
The night before last, Russian draft resolution
S/2023/772 focused on the humanitarian situation in
the conflict between Palestine and Israel, and called for
an immediate ceasefire and the protection of civilians.
That draft resolution received a great deal of support
and sponsorship from Arab countries. However, some
countries chose to cast a negative vote. The reason given
then was that they intended, rather, to base their positions
on the draft resolution submitted by Brazil so as to have
more time to deliberate. Brazil and other colleagues
agreed to that request by postponing the voting for
another 24 hours, which was followed by a further delay,
until now. Over the past 40 hours, those countries have
neither commented on nor expressed opposition to the
Brazilian draft resolution. That led us to hope that today
they would vote in favour of the draft resolution and the
Council would be able to adopt the resolution.
However, the final result of the vote is nothing short
of unbelievable. China also believes that the Brazilian
draft resolution still has room for improvement. It
should send a strong message and call for a ceasefire
and the protection of civilians so as to prevent a
humanitarian catastrophe.
China has therefore proposed amendments intended
to improve the draft resolution, while at the same time
agreeing with the Russian amendment. We are very
disappointed that it failed to be adopted. Nevertheless, in
view of the rapidly deteriorating situation in Gaza and the
air strike on the hospital, among other actions, yesterday,
which resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties, the
Council therefore must take immediate measures. China
condemns in the strongest terms any air strike against
hospitals, and we urge Israel to effectively adhere to its
the obligations under international humanitarian law.
We call for an immediate ceasefire and the protection of
civilians to prevent a greater humanitarian catastrophe.
The draft resolution submitted by Brazil reflects
the general view of the international community as to
the initial steps that the Council should take to achieve
a ceasefire. And, given the current circumstances, it
might be the only possible draft resolution on which the
Council can reach a consensus. Certain countries are
stating orally that the Council should take appropriate
action. However, their votes on the text of the draft
resolution raise doubts regarding their willingness to
enable the Council to take meaningful action and to find
a solution to the problem.
In the final analysis, Council members should not
sit idly by. The current situation in Gaza is escalating.
An increasing number of civilians are paying the price
with their lives and bearing the brunt of the conflict.
Therefore, concerning the issue of a ceasefire, the
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians and
the prevention of a greater humanitarian catastrophe, the
Council must effectively shoulder its responsibility and
play its due role.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique would
like to commend Brazil and your presidency, Sir, for the
excellent leadership in conducting this work, which is
thorny, but important. We also thank you for providing
the Security Council with a very valuable text.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2023/773).
We deeply regret that it could not be adopted, owing to
the exercise of the veto. In voting in favour of the draft
resolution, Mozambique would like to express its deep
concern about the outbreak and escalation of violence, the
deterioration of the situation in Gaza and the consequent
unfolding humanitarian crisis. Moreover, we are deeply
concerned about the human lives being lost on a daily
basis since the conflict erupted. The civilian population,
mainly children, women and the elderly, are suffering the
most from the atrocities and the grave effects of the war.
In supporting the draft resolution, Mozambique
associates itself with the collective efforts of the Council
aimed at ensuring the protection of civilians and
respect for international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, as
applied to the conflict both in Gaza and in Israel. It is
our strong call that humanitarian aid must reach the
populations in need in Gaza. That includes the provision
of essential goods and services and medical supplies.

18/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9442
23-31062 7/10
We are conscious of the fact that, ultimately,
humanitarian problems need political solutions. That
belief reflects our own experience, which originates
in our protracted struggle against colonialism, racism
and apartheid in the Southern African region. In that
context, we urge all parties to immediately stop attacks,
refrain from further violence and engage in constructive
dialogue. Mozambique firmly believes that Israel and
Palestine can resolve their differences only through
dialogue. We hold the view that peace is always possible
if the conflicting parties are genuinely willing to follow
the path of justice and tolerance. We would therefore
like to reiterate our appeal to members of the Council
to redouble our efforts towards a sustainable solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We believe that
the Palestinian people and the Israeli people have an
inalienable right to statehood. They can live together,
side by side, in peace and security, as good neighbours.
As a matter of fact, the Charter of the United Nations
compels the parties and indeed the entire international
community to practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
your presidency, Sir, and all delegations for their efforts
to produce a consensual draft resolution that could
have helped support the efforts of the Security Council
to de-escalate the growing tensions and respond to the
tragic situation that we are all witnessing in the Gaza
Strip and southern Israel. We deeply regret that the
draft resolution (S/2023/773) could not be adopted. For
Ghana, we have always held that, to the extent possible,
the Council should speak as one voice on this important
dispute, the fault lines of which reach many distant
parts of the world. We have therefore, from the very
beginning, given priority to the efforts, entrusted to the
presidency, to lead all of us in that direction. It was also
in that regard that we voted in favour of the Brazilian
draft resolution but deemed it important to abstain in the
voting on the draft resolution (S/2023/772) proposed on
Monday night (see S/PV.9439) and the draft amendments
to today’s draft resolution (S/2023/775 and S/2023/776),
to preserve the broadest possible agreement that was
found to guide us in a common direction.
Despite the highly sensitive nature of the decades-
old Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the differences in
approaches that we may have in resolving it, what should
be paramount is our historic responsibility as a Council
to deliver the two-State solution and preserve the lives
of the two nations whose destinies are bound by history
and a common and shared area. The Council’s inability
to act on its responsibility today, however, should not
break our resolve. We believe that a united Council voice
and action on the matter is still required and critical to
stabilizing the situation and assisting the parties to enter
into in dialogue, which is the only viable path to durable
peace. We should therefore continue to ask the parties to
de-escalate, seek consensus to support mediation efforts
and knock on the doors of all those who can have a
moderating influence on the parties to open up the space
for dialogue.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2023/773), because it can support
its main ideas, bearing in mind various perspectives,
including the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Japan has
unequivocally condemned the terror attacks by Hamas
and others and called for the immediate release of those
who were kidnapped. We feel enormous indignation at the
tremendous damage and harm done to innocent civilians
by the attack on a hospital in Gaza City on 17 October.
At the same time, we would like to point out that
Japan had asked to delay the vote on the draft resolution
proposed by Brazil on the understanding that various
countries, including the United States, have continued
to make diplomatic efforts on the ground to improve the
situation as soon as possible. Japan greatly regrets that
the draft resolution was nonetheless put to a vote today.
Japan has consistently and strongly supported and put
its faith in diplomatic efforts by President Biden of the
United States and leaders of other relevant countries.
All of us — and especially those who have referred
to hypocrisy — should think twice about whether we
are really being faithful to the principles of human
rights and doing enough to make a difference on the
ground where improving the humanitarian situation is
concerned. Action is needed. Japan will continue to work
with other countries to ensure the safety of civilians
and de-escalate the situation as quickly as possible.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Since 7 October, Switzerland has strongly condemned the
acts of terror, indiscriminate attacks and hostage-taking
perpetrated by Hamas against the Israeli population. We
deplore the deaths of thousands of civilians, including
hundreds of children, in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly Gaza. Switzerland joins
the Secretary-General in unequivocally condemning the
strikes, particularly the one that according to the United
Nations caused hundreds of deaths and dozens of injuries
yesterday at the Al Ahli Anglican-Episcopal Hospital.
We express our sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and to the injured.

S/PV.9442 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 18/10/2023
8/10 23-31062
We are deeply concerned about the large-scale
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the tragic situation
facing the civilian population. Almost a million
people are displaced. There is an urgent need to allow
humanitarian aid to enter Gaza, with water, electricity
and medical supplies running out.
The day before yesterday (see S/PV.9439), all
of us around this table said that the situation in the
Middle East requires united and urgent action by the
Council. De-escalation, the protection of civilians,
humane treatment of all hostages — whose immediate
release Switzerland calls for — and rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access are top priorities.
The draft resolution presented by Brazil (S/2023/773)
responded to those priorities and was aimed at achieving
a common understanding within the Council, which
is why Switzerland voted in favour of it and why we
deeply regret that it was not adopted today. I would like
to once again thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
its sustained commitment. It is unfortunate that we have
not yet been able to reach consensus on a product that
demonstrates our unity in the face of the situation.
Regardless of whether a draft resolution is adopted,
all parties must respect international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution, as well as human rights. International
humanitarian law takes into account legitimate security
and military necessity, and all of those rules must
therefore be respected without exception.
Switzerland has made every effort to contribute to
the search for consensus on a Council decision in this
urgent situation. In that same spirit, we remain willing
to support any new initiative that could lead to action by
the Council.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): The Council
finds its credibility being put to the test this morning in
the face of the scale of the deadly violence in Israel and
Gaza and the extreme gravity of the crisis in the Middle
East, whose shockwaves threaten peace and security
throughout the region and beyond. As the Security
Council, our mandate is to stop wars — if not prevent
them — and to alleviate the human suffering resulting
from such crises.
This morning the Security Council has failed to live
up to its mandate. The rhetoric around this table has been
of no help or recourse to civilians in Gaza, who are being
crushed beneath indiscriminate missile and rocket strikes
and deprived of any means of survival. Once again,
all things political and geopolitical have paralysed the
Council’s capacity for action. The Council has offered no
reaction to the horror and the cries of distress from the
civilian population in the face of one of the most serious
crises in the Middle East. We are watching helplessly as
the tolls of death and destruction rise. The Council has
provided no coherent response that gives a glimmer of
hope to the children, women, hostages and people of the
world who scrutinize our deliberations for their survival
and safety.
My country voted in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by the Brazilian presidency (S/2023/773), as
well as the two proposed amendments (S/2023/775 and
S/2023/776), because it is crucial and urgent to act, after
our firm condemnation of the barbaric attacks on Israel
on 7 October and our recognition of Israel’s right to self-
defence while respecting the principle of proportionality
and distinction between combatants and civilians.
It is our firm belief that given the magnitude of this
deadly violence — which in just a few days has caused
thousands of deaths and immeasurable humanitarian
distress — we need to call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and for opening humanitarian corridors to
alleviate the suffering of the civilian population. Our
position has been clear since the Council’s first meeting
following the 7 October attack. The taking of hostages
is unacceptable, unjustifiable and indefensible, and we
reiterate that they must be released without conditions
or blackmail.
We regret that the Council was unable to transcend
its divisions and fragmentation. We will certainly have to
demonstrate greater responsibility in finding a solution
to the crisis in the Middle East, which is so chronic
that it puts our credibility in question and damages our
reputation. For Gabon, a two-State solution remains
the only viable alternative. We can and must achieve it
through good-faith diplomacy and negotiations and by
overcoming the fears and vested interests that distance
us from our collective responsibility to maintain peace
and security in the region and beyond.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for your efforts
in good faith to negotiate a draft resolution (S/2023/773).
The draft resolution on which we have just voted rightly
condemns the appalling Hamas terrorist attacks on
Israel on 7 October. It also makes clear that all actions
in this situation must be taken in line with international
humanitarian law. It stresses the importance of ensuring
humanitarian access and the protection of civilians and
emphasizes the Council’s shared priority of preventing a
regional escalation of the conflict.

18/10/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9442
23-31062 9/10
While we welcome and support the draft resolution’s
attempts to lay out the Council’s view on those critical
points, it needed to be clearer on Israel’s inherent right to
self-defence, in line with the Charter of the United Nations,
after Hamas attacks killed more than 1,400 people and
took almost 200 more hostage. The draft resolution
also ignored the fact that Hamas is using innocent
Palestinian civilian as human shields. It has embedded
itself in civilian communities and made the Palestinian
people its victims, too. For those reasons the United
Kingdom abstained in the vote on the draft resolution.
My Prime Minister has been clear that the United
Kingdom stands with Israel in the face of those atrocities.
We support Israel’s right to defend itself against Hamas,
take back the hostages, deter further incursions and
strengthen its security for the long term. In doing so,
we will continue to call on Israel to take all feasible
precautions to avoid harming Palestinian civilians and to
act in line with international humanitarian law. We will
continue to work closely with Israel and our partners in
the region to respond to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
to ensure that civilians are protected and have access to
food, water, medicine and shelter and to work towards the
peace and stability promised by the two-State solution.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We voted in favour of the draft resolution proposed
by the Brazilian presidency (S/2023/773), as did many
other members of the Security Council. It was the
result of a constructive and collective negotiating
process that included all Security Council members,
and we are convinced that collective work and good-
faith negotiations are indispensable for effective
multilateralism. They constitute the best pathway
forward to fulfil the responsibilities placed upon us.
We are convinced that the Council cannot continue to
be silent in the face of events that are clearly a threat
to international peace and security and that are already
having grave humanitarian consequences. The Brazilian
presidency’s draft resolution includes elements that are
necessary in the face of a situation that is worsening by
the minute. The credibility of the Council depends on
our decisions at times like this. Ecuador abstained with
regard to the amendments (S/2023/775 and S/2023/776),
since the aspects therein were covered in the draft
resolution. We regret the fact that once again the Council
was unable to adopt a draft resolution due to the use
of the veto. However, our efforts do not end here. We
will do everything within our grasp to ensure that the
Council can rapidly reach a decision and take action with
regard to this conflict.
On 24 September 1973, Ecuadorian Foreign Minister
Ambassador Antonio Lucio Paredes spoke before the
General Assembly and said:
“it is equally necessary that the activities of the
great Powers, that in one way or another support the
parties to the conflict in the Middle East, must be
directed to finding solutions for the establishment
of constructive peace and not stand in the way of
possible formulas of agreement and understanding.
The conflict in the Middle East, because of its
explosive nature, obliges the United Nations to try
unflaggingly to end it.” (A/PV.2124, paragraph 145)
Those words remain valid even though they were said
more than 50 years ago.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank Brazil for their
efforts, their diligence in providing time and their
continued engagement with all Security Council
members. The text came at a very critical moment, not
only because of the conflict between Israel and Hamas
and the huge impact it is having on civilians, but also due
to the revived dangers for the region and beyond. Albania
voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2023/773)
because the text responded to core objectives on the
issue and to our coherent and principled position. It
strongly and unequivocally condemned Hamas and its
indefensible terrorist attacks on Israel on 7 October. As
the Secretary-General called on Hamas to do last Sunday,
it called for the immediate release of the hostages, which
should remain a humanitarian priority. The hostages
should be released immediately and unconditionally. It
provided for the protection of civilians in accordance
with international humanitarian law and for the flow of
the humanitarian aid to all those in need. It also supports
regional and international efforts for a solution on the
ground and embraces a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
In that respect, we commend the very active engagement
at every level by the United States and others in finding
the best solutions on the ground. While we supported
the draft resolution, Albania reaffirms its position in
full support of Israel and its right to self-defence, like
every other nation under attack, which the text falls short
of mentioning.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): It is
perhaps beyond me to put into words the abject horrors
we are witnessing in Gaza. That is why the United Arab
Emirates fully supported the Security Council taking
action today, and why we still support the Council
taking action on the situation. For more than 140 years,
the Al Ahli Baptist Hospital has provided medical care

S/PV.9442 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 18/10/2023
10/10 23-31062
and shelter for generations of Gazans. Yesterday more
than 500 Palestinians were killed in a strike that hit the
hospital. Each passing hour of this ruinous war makes a
mockery of the principles of international humanitarian
law. Gaza is laid to waste, and nobody feels safe. We call
for a full independent investigation into this incident and
for those who are responsible to be held accountable.
As we verify information about the strikes, one fact
still remains indisputable: more Palestinians have died in
this outbreak of violence than in any other in the history
of the conflict. In less than two weeks of bombardment,
more than 3,500 Palestinians have been killed and more
than 14,000 injured. Will we continue to sit here and
compare the casualties on both sides? We support no less
than a full humanitarian ceasefire. We do not ask for this
to be done at the expense of Israel’s security, but so that
people may tend to their wounded, bury their dead in
dignity and begin putting their lives back together. This
ceasefire is also crucial so that vital humanitarian aid
may enter and that aid workers can do their work safely.
Hamas is indeed responsible for sparking this latest
fire that is now engulfing the streets of Arab capitals
around the region. We have openly called them out for
the heinous attacks on 7 October. But make no mistake:
the kindling was already there, fuelled by decades of
violent dehumanization, dispossession and despair. That
is why we cannot, however convenient, lose sight of the
context of this crisis, the longest-going occupation in
the world today of a people that do not wish to be ruled
and have been let down again and again and again by all
of us.
The United Arab Emirates voted for this draft
resolution (S/2023/773) not because it is a perfect text,
but because it clearly states basic principles that must be
upheld and that the Council is obliged to reinforce and
uphold. We sincerely thank Brazil and its delegation for
their efforts, and we remain hopeful that in the coming
days we can unite behind a draft resolution. We also
remain hopeful that, in parallel, diplomatic efforts led by
the United States will help lead us all off the brink that
we are edging towards.
As I and others said yesterday, the current escalation
must drive all of us, but most importantly Israelis and
Palestinians, to the urgent work of achieving the two-
State solution. Let me be clear that the only alternative
to that is the violence we see right now. Three years
ago, my country established diplomatic relations with
Israel. The Abraham Accords are grounded in the
simple but enduring truth that peace and dialogue are
better than violence and enmity. Along with our Israeli
and American partners, we sought a new Middle East
where coexistence and cooperation deliver prosperity,
security and peace for all. The indiscriminate damage
visited upon the people of Gaza in pursuit of Israel’s
security risks extinguishing that hope. The region is
already contending with the spillover of this crisis, and
the enemies of peace are unapologetic about their aims.
Let us not play into their hands.
It has been said over the past few days that this crisis
is a test for the international community and for the
Security Council. That is true. Noa Argamani, a young
Jewish woman abducted by Hamas, is in her second
year of computer studies at Ben-Gurion University. Her
mother is undergoing cancer treatment, and she is their
only child. In a conversation with a journalist about the
horror inflicted on this family, Yakov recalled that “in
Gaza, too, families are mourning their children”. He
described Israelis and Palestinians as “two nations with
one father” and added that “we can reach true peace, and
I am praying for this to happen. Amen to the hostages’
return”.
Twenty-two-year-old Dunia Abu Rahma, an
architectural student in Gaza, is one of the thousands of
civilians fleeing south today. Last night, she told CNN
that, up until recently, all she had been thinking about
was her graduation project. Now all she thinks about is
how to be safe.
The test is whether or not we sustain that hope for
peace that shines even through a parent’s unspeakable
anguish and through a child’s aspiration to just be normal
like the rest of us. We cannot doom millions of people
to misery because diplomacy is hard. We must keep
trying — again and again and again. We must recognize
that, by continuing to fail to respond to the Palestinian
people’s legitimate aspirations for a country in their
homeland, we fuel this unrelenting cycle of violence and
hatred. Let us not fail this test — for the sake of Israelis,
for the sake of Palestinians and for the sake of all the
peoples of the Middle East.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.
