A notice about cookies
This website uses cookies to collect information about how you use this site. This information is used to make the website work as well as possible. More details available in our cookie and privacy policies.
Accept all cookies
Necessary cookies only
Manage cookies
News
Departments
Services
Search search close
Gaeilge
menu close
close
News
Departments
Services
Search gov.ie
Search search
Press release
Statement by the Tánaiste on the International Criminal Court Decision
From: Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Published on: 21 November 2024
Last updated on: 12 April 2025
The ICC today decided to issue arrest warrants for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Yoav Gallant and Mohammed Diab Ibrahim Al-Masri for alleged crimes against humanity and war crimes in Israel and Palestine.
This decision follows the court’s determination that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the alleged crimes were committed by these individuals.
Ireland is a strong supporter of the ICC and calls on all States to respect its independence and impartiality, with no attempts made to undermine the court.
Ireland has committed €3 million in voluntary contributions to the ICC in the past year.
Help us improve gov.ie
Leave feedback
This form is only for feedback relating to the current page.
Do not include personal or financial information.
The information you submit will be analysed to improve gov.ie and will not be responded to individually.
Full Name:
Email Address:
Phone Number:
Website:
How was your experience on the current page? * (required)
Positive
Negative
Describe your experience on our site
You have 400 characters remaining
Submit
Circulars
Consultations
Directory
Policies
Publications
About gov.ie
Accessibility
Latest financial accounts
Privacy policy
Who Does What
Manage cookie preferences
Manage preferences
Cookie preferences
close
Cookies that help with our communications
These cookies may be set by third party websites and do things like measure how you view YouTube videos that are on this site.
Allow
Save preferences Close
