Your Highness
Excellencies
,
It is a great pleasure to participate in and address the first India-GCC Ministerial Meeting for Strategic Dialogue. Our meeting today is not just an occasion to reflect on our achievements, but an opportunity to chart an ambitious and far-reaching course for the future.
The relationship between India and the GCC is rooted in a rich tapestry of history, culture, and shared values. These bonds have grown stronger with time, evolving into a partnership that spans economics, energy, defence, technology, education, people to people ties and beyond.
There are many ways to contemplate our partnership. Let me offer the framework of 3Ps – People, Prosperity and Progress.
Our people-to-people ties are the bedrock of our relationship. Close to 9 million Indians work and live amongst you, acting as a living bridge between us. Their contributions to your economic progress are widely recognized. We thank you for ensuring their welfare and comfort.
Our interactions are key to driving prosperity – for the GCC and for India. Trade has not only expanded in volume but also in diversity, encompassing a wide range of goods and services that fuel our economies and create jobs. It is important that we think not just for today. The task before us is to invest in each other’s future and support each other’s continued prosperity.
The GCC is a cornerstone of global energy supply. India is one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing markets. Much of the future demand is going to come from us. Our deeper collaboration will help in stabilizing markets, driving innovation and enhancing energy security.
Our partnership in the areas of renewables, technology and innovation, health, space, education can also help realize our respective national goals.
But our relationship goes beyond just transactions. It is built on a foundation of trust, mutual respect, and a shared vision for the future. It has a larger goal of advancing progress in a world that is characterized by technological advancements, changing geopolitics, shifts in the global economy and the urgent need to address environmental sustainability.
Progress and prosperity require its concomitant – security – to also be stronger. The Gulf region occupies a central place in contemporary geopolitics. In a world polarized by conflict and tension, we share a commitment to global peace, security, and stability.
The current situation in Gaza is now understandably our foremost concern. India’s position in this regard has been principled and consistent. While we condemn acts of terrorism and hostage taking, we are deeply pained by the continuing death of innocent civilians. Any response must take into account the principles of humanitarian law. We support a ceasefire as soon as possible.
On the larger issue, we have consistently stood for a resolution of the Palestinian issue through a two-State solution. We have also contributed to the building of Palestinian institutions and capacities. Where the humanitarian situation is concerned, we have provided relief and increased our support to UNRWA.
Colleagues, sometimes it is adversity that brings out the real importance of friendships. The pandemic underlined how relevant we are to each other for health security, food security and maritime security. Similarly, the demands of AI, of electric mobility and of green growth highlight the importance of sharing human resources. Conflict and tensions bring out the importance of cooperating on connectivity. In a world moving towards multipolarity, we can be mutually supportive of each other’s aspirations.
As I look forward to our discussions, let me recognize your commitment to this partnership. Let us use this platform to deepen our ties, explore new avenues of cooperation, and build a collaborative future.
Your Highness and Excellencies, I thank you for your attention and look forward to our discussions.
