Jerusalem Post/Israel News/Defense News
In 2021, Honduras became one of the first countries to move its embassy to Jerusalem, joining the US, Guatemala, and Kosovo.
Follow us on Google
Defense Minister Israel Katz with a Honduran military delegation, August 16, 2026
(photo credit: DEFENSE MINISTRY)
ByLEO FEIERBERG BETTER
AUGUST 17, 2026 04:02
Updated: AUGUST 17, 2026 18:14
Israel and Honduras signed a Memorandum of Understanding in a Sunday ceremony, the Defense Ministry announced in a statement.
Defense Minister Israel Katz and his Honduran counterpart, Enrique Rodríguez Burchard, signed the deal, which is meant to “deepen defense cooperation” between the countries, the ministry said.
The ceremony was also attended by Defense Ministry director-general Maj. Gen. (Res.) Amir Baram, the senior deputy head of the policy and political-military bureau, Israel’s defense attache to Honduras, and other senior officials from both countries.
During the visit, the Honduran defense minister, Honduran internal security minister, and the Honduran Armed Forces chief of the joint staff participated in “wide-ranging security discussions” with Baram, the statement said.
Part of the discussions included shared strategic and security issues, as well as ways to expand cooperation, the ministry said. Further, the Honduran officials were briefed on “key lessons” learned from Israel's wars in the past few years.
Additionally, the delegation was informed about the Defense Ministry’s current activities, “as well as key aspects of Israel’s defense and defense-industrial establishment.
Defense Minister Israel Katz signs a memorandum of understanding with a Honduran delegation, August 16, 2026 (credit: DEFENSE MINISTRY)
Honduras considered key ally in Jerusalem recognition, embassy move
This MoU is a part of a series of agreements designed by the Defense Ministry over the past year, the statement said, casting these moves as “part of the ministry’s strategy to expand Israel’s circle of defense partnerships, strengthen strategic ties with friendly nations, and deepen cooperation between Israel’s defense industries and international markets.”
The statement described Honduras as an “important partner” in Central America, and one that has supported Israel internationally over the years.
In 2017, Honduras was among the nine countries that voted against a UN General Assembly resolution condemning the US’ recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.
In 2021, Honduras became one of the first countries to move its embassy to Jerusalem, joining the US, Guatemala, and Kosovo.
After withdrawing its ambassador from Israel in the wake of Hamas’s October 7 massacre, Honduras appointed a new envoy in early August, who was received by President Isaac Herzog.
Follow us on Google
