NATIONAL STATEMENT
BY
YB DATO’ SERI UTAMA HAJI MOHAMAD BIN HAJI HASSAN
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, MALAYSIA
AT THE EXTRAORDINARY MEETING OF
THE COUNCIL OF FOREIGN MINISTERS OF THE OIC MEMBER STATES
27 AUGUST 2026
JEDDAH, SAUDI ARABIA
His Excellency Hakan Fidan
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkiye
His Excellency Ismail (Walad) Cheikh Ahmed
Secretary-General of the OIC
Your Highnesses, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Sisters and Brothers,
Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh.
1. I would like to express my appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for the generous hospitality accorded to me and my delegation.
1

Agenda 1: Election of the Secretary-General
2. Firstly, I join others in expressing Malaysia’s support to H.E. Ismail
(Walad) Cheikh Ahmed for the post of Secretary-General of the OIC for the
term 2026-2031.
3. We are confident that under his leadership, the OIC will strengthen its
unity, solidarity, and voice. Malaysia reaffirms its steadfast support for the
Secretary-General and the General Secretariat in defending Palestinian
rights, protecting Al-Quds Ash-Sharif, and serving the Ummah.
4. Furthermore, Malaysia expresses its sincere appreciation to His
Excellency Hissein Ibrahim Taha, the outgoing Secretary-General, for his
dedicated service and leadership.
Agenda 2: Palestine and Al-Quds Ash-Sharif
Mr. Chair,
5. We convene today to confront a profound moral crisis that tests the
credibility of the international order.
6. Gaza lies devastated, with families shattered and over 70,000
innocent lives tragically lost.
7. For nearly three years now, the international community has called for
the protection of civilians, humanitarian access and a permanent ceasefire.
8. Yet Israel has relentlessly continued to bomb homes, hospitals, and
schools while blocking humanitarian aid and subjecting the people of Gaza
to deliberate starvation and immense, unthinkable suffering. This
modern-day colonisation must be stopped.
2

Illegal Settlements in the West Bank
9. In the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Israel's
relentless expansion of illegal settlements, including the aggressive
so-called E1 plan, is designed to permanently dismantle the viability of a
Palestinian State.
10. Malaysia strongly condemns the Israeli regime's USD 2.3 billion
illegal settlement scheme and urges all OIC member states to decisively
uphold the ICJ Advisory Opinion of 19 July 2024 by rejecting and
withholding support for this illegal occupation.
Al-Quds Ash-Sharif
11. Jerusalem remains an inseparable core of the Occupied Palestinian
Territory. Malaysia strongly condemns the heinous incursion into the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound on 23 July 2026 by Israeli Minister, settlers and
extreme far-right figures. Such outrageous provocations should never be
tolerated.
12. In light of these alarming actions, Malaysia calls on all Member States
to commit to safeguarding the sanctity of Al-Quds Ash-Sharif and to fully
support the historical Hashemite Custodianship over the Islamic and
Christian Holy Sites in Jerusalem.
Mr. Chair,
13. The illegal seizure of UNRWA’s Kalandia Training Centre and the
adoption of mandatory death penalty legislation targeting Palestinians are
grave violations of international humanitarian law. We call on the UN
Security Council to enforce international law and protect UNRWA’s
mandate.
3

14. Against such blatant defiance, it is our collective duty to shield
member nations from Israeli atrocities and resolutely confront their
persistent violations of global legal norms. OIC must remain steadfast in
championing a rules-based order, ensuring that Israel is held fully
responsible for its actions.
15. Malaysia therefore calls for the following:
(i) Firstly, the OIC should continuously call on the international
community to stop Israel’s belligerence through an immediate and
permanent ceasefire, as well as providing unhindered humanitarian access;
(ii) Secondly, Israel must stop settler violence in the West Bank, the
illegal evictions of Palestinians in Jerusalem and any action that may alter
the identity of Jerusalem, including the holy sites;
(iii) Thirdly, we need to build the foundations for an independent and
viable Palestinian statehood. In this regard, Malaysia calls on OIC member
states to provide greater support for the protection, reconstruction, and
strengthening of Palestinian institutions; and
(iv) Finally, we need to ensure the two-state solution remains the only
internationally recognised and viable pathway for sustainable peace. Our
objectives remain consistent. We need to end the occupation, enable
Palestine to govern itself and make Palestinian statehood a reality.
16. Let there be no ambiguity: Malaysia stands resolutely and
unequivocally behind the establishment of a fully independent, sovereign,
viable, and contiguous State of Palestine, based on the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. This is not merely a diplomatic
preference; it is a fundamental imperative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
4
