World leaders today stressed the need for a new equitable global order to reflect the realities of a polarized world during the fifth day of the General Assembly’s annual high-level debate and called for reduced dominance by Western countries.
“Confrontation and hegemony will not resolve any global problem, they will hold back the objective process of the formation of a multipolar world order that will be based on the equal rights of large and small nations”, said Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian Federation’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, urging the West to refrain from “their neocolonial practices of mining the entire world for their benefit”. He stressed that “addressing the most complex problems facing all of humanity is something we can only do together taking into account one another’s interests”, and the Global South and the East are speaking up for their rights to decision-making on a global scale, both through many regional organizations and other formations, such as BRICS (Brazil, Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa).
For its part, China calls for “a new type of international relations characterized by mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation”, said its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi. In today’s world, the security of all countries is intertwined and “no one can enjoy security alone”, he said. He observed that “the aspirations of the Global South nations for modernization have never been stronger” and such is “the legitimate right of the people of all countries, not a prerogative of a few”, advocating for inclusive economic globalization. To this end, he underscored the need to oppose unilateralism and protectionism and help developing countries leap over the developing divide. All countries — regardless of their size — have their place in a multipolar system, he asserted.
Citing global challenges that have led to a fractious, polarized and frustrated world, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, India’s Minister for External Affairs, emphasized: “The problems arise from a combination of structural shortcomings, political calculations, naked self-interest, and yes, disregard for those left behind.” India has created “templates that are replicable elsewhere”, such as its digital transformation, to share with the rest of the world. Noting the unfairness of the current globalization model, which has caused many to get left behind, he stressed: “The UN has always maintained that peace and development go hand in hand. Yet, when challenges to one have emerged, due regard has not been given to the other.”
“The voices of middle Powers and developing nations are vital in bridging divides and nurturing a more effective international security architecture”, said Murat Nurtleu, Kazakhstan’s Minister for Foreign Affairs. Geographical constraints prevent landlocked countries, like his, from integrating into global trade networks. For its part, Kazakhstan will harness synergies between the Belt and Road project, the Global Gateway Initiative and the North-South and Trans Caspian International Transport Route corridors to transform “our landlocked status into land-linked connectivity,” he declared.
Mohamad Hasan, Malaysia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, said that as the chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2025, his country will aim to fortify ASEAN’s centrality to prevent the region from “becoming entrapped in unnecessary geopolitical rivalry or possible escalation”.
Speakers from several developing countries took the floor and illustrated national and regional efforts to overcome their development challenges amid the global crises, including climate change.
Among them was Dickon Mitchell, Prime Minister of Grenada and the Chair of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), who said his region is asking for more than just financial aid. It is looking for partnerships where all States can work together on climate adaptation, he stressed. “What happens in Grenada does not just stay in Grenada,” he said, assuring that the lessons his country learned after coping with hurricanes can help other nations overcome their own climate crises, from wildfires in Canada to flooding in Europe. Resilience is not just about surviving a storm but ensuring that States emerge from it stronger, more united and more understanding of each other than ever before, he added.
Similarly, Guinea is determined to “write a new history, a new story” of a resilient nation that is “reinventing itself” to provide its people with dignity, freedom and prosperity, said its Prime Minister, Amadou Oury Bah. His country aims to “become a model of resilience and renewal in Africa,” he said.
“We did not envision challenges from technological disruptions, pandemics and climate crisis,” when the UN was founded seven decades ago, observed Maris Sangiampongsa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand. Recalling that 78 years ago, Thailand looked at the UN as a guarantor of a more peaceful and prosperous future, he stressed that the Organization must remain relevant.
Maxim Ryzhenkov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belarus, commented that the Charter of the UN “is not perfect — just like we are not perfect. But it’s the best we have”. The establishment of the Group of Friends in Defense of the Charter was due to a number of countries not abiding by the norms enshrined in the Charter. Noting that the Organization should throw off the dictate of a number of States that are feeling “exceptional”, he stressed: “The UN is all of us.”
Recalling that the UN “rose up from the ashes of war to restore faith in fundamental human rights”, Francis Fonseca, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Belize, underscored that all Member States have a duty to give effect to these words. “The self-determination of a people is sacrosanct,” he emphasized, adding that through the exercise of this right, nations enjoy the privilege of sitting in the General Assembly’s Hall. ”We have a Pact for the Future,” he noted. However, small island developing States must be at the table in global economic and international financial institutions.
Eyhun Bayramov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, said that a reinvigorated and reformed multilateral system, with the UN at its core, must be underpinned by the non-selective application of universally accepted norms and principles of international law. Recalling that the Pact of the Future is a blueprint for building a better, more sustainable and prosperous world for everyone, he stressed: “It is time for our collective commitments to turn into real and decisive action.”
As one of only 19 women speaking from the podium during the opening session, Thórdís Kolbrún Reykfjörd Gylfadóttir, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iceland, lamented: “I thought we had come further than this,” and highlighted the plight of girls and women in certain countries who were being denied education and public participation. “We cannot build a future fit for our grandchildren with systems built for our grandparents,” she stated.
Statements
DICKON MITCHELL, Prime Minister of Grenada and Chair of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), emphasized that Cuba continues to face severe economic hardships, and Haiti has an urgent humanitarian crisis. As Cuba is on the United States list of State sponsors of terrorism and the blockade remains in place, CARICOM is deeply troubled that the Cuban people have been forced to endure this 60-year imposition, he said, calling for an end to the blockade. Turning to Haiti, he thanked Belize and Jamaica for sending security personnel to support the Kenyan troops there and said that funding for the Multinational Security Support Mission remains critical. He urged support for this Mission and efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis, especially by helping Haitian children’s access to education. For 16 million people in the Caribbean Community, resilience is “the definition of daily life”.
He said he was born in 1977 in a small hillside village in Grenada where his and most other households did not have running water or electricity. In 1979, Grenada experienced a political revolution that brought many changes when education and tourism became a focus. In 1983, the revolution came to a violent end because of the American intervention, and he had to collect spice in the hills and sell it to continue his studies, he recalled. “As Prime Minister, I am determined to ensure that the resilience I learned becomes a cornerstone of Grenada’s future and the future of the wider Caribbean,” he emphasized, adding that education will empower the next generation of leaders, thinkers and dreamers, so Grenada is working to ensure that every child has access to free education up to 18. “Digital education — and digitization more broadly — is a priority for our Government,” he said.
Recalling the devastation inflicted on his island by Hurricane Ivan in 2004 and by Hurricane Emily less than one year later, he emphasized: “We borrowed heavily, and we were thankful to be able to do so, but […] for many years after, we struggled under the weight of that debt.” As the islands Carriacou and Petite Martinique were hit by Hurricane Beryl causing unimaginable destruction three months ago, he said this round of rebuilding will take months, if not years. “We understand that we cannot continue to rebuild after every storm without seeking sustainable solutions,” he noted, adding that the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility was established to allow receiving financial payouts and recovering more swiftly from natural disasters. “We also introduced a hurricane relief clause in our financial agreements, enabling us to suspend debt payments in times of crisis, giving us the resources we need to focus on recovery,” he noted, also calling on the international community to make good on its promise of mobilizing $100 billion annually to developing countries for climate action.
Stressing that CARICOM has a clear vision and plan to harness technology ranging from drones that assess storm damage to early warning systems that enhance preparedness, he spotlighted: “We are asking for more than just financial aid. We are looking for partnerships where we can work together on climate adaptation.” Calling the Caribbean “a living lab” on the front lines of global climatic challenge, he said, “Let us help you,” and paraphrased a famous tourism slogan: “What happens in Grenada does not just stay in Grenada.” He assured that the lessons they are learning can help nations facing their own climate crises, from wildfires in Canada to flooding in Europe. “Resilience is not just about surviving a storm — it is about ensuring that, together, we emerge from it stronger, more united and more understanding of each other than ever before,” he concluded.
AMADOU OURY BAH, Prime Minister of Guinea, said that at the time of global turbulence — marked by conflicts, rising inequalities and a climate crisis — it is crucial to be “bold in action and united in vision”. He emphasized that his country is determined to turn the page on instability and “write a new history, a new story” of a resilient nation that is “reinventing itself” to provide its people with dignity, freedom and prosperity. Guinea, he said, aims to “become a model of resilience and renewal in Africa” in the face of adversity, with the historic trial regarding the 2009 events serving as a testament to the nation’s fight against impunity.
He said that President Mamadi Doumbouya’s vision is underpinned by five core values: institutional justice, integrity, reconciliation, recovery and repositioning. These values, he emphasized, will guide Guinea’s transformation “in a spirit of justice, solidarity and dignity”. Detailing the Simandou 2040 Project, he emphasized that the mining initiative has evolved into much more: “a model for comprehensive transformation” for his country. The project includes a 670-kilometre multi-use railway for iron ore exploitation and integrates social and environmental programmes. Guinea is learning from the mistakes of other nations that have succumbed to the “natural resource curse” and is committed to making Simandou a lever for shared prosperity and sustainable growth.
Noting that his country is drafting a new constitution, he said it will ensure that “each citizen, regardless of their origins, culture or space, has a role to play in a harmonious and close-knit social fabric”. “The path toward transformation cannot be accomplished singlehandedly,” he said, calling for international support based on “partnership, an active and dynamic alliance” rather than compassion. Highlighting his country’s active role in global peacekeeping, including a commitment of over 650 police officers to the stabilization of Haiti, he urged to “rethink” the ways of resolving persistent conflicts. “It is high time to transcend purely military responses, and it is time to promote an integrated strategy that combines economic development, institutional strengthening and heightened regional cooperation,” he stressed.
On Security Council reform, he called for “a more equitable and democratic representation” to give Africa permanent seats and veto rights. Also, he emphasized the importance of investing in youth, stressing that this can help combat the “evils that drive them toward clandestine immigration” and drain the country of its human resources. Turning to the technological advancements, he underscored the importance of ensuring that ethics remain central to their use. “Today we are calling for the nations to come together around a common vision of the world that places humans at the heart of every thought and action,” he stressed, adding: “The world is waiting for us to do this.”
PIETRO PAROLIN, Secretary of State of the Holy See, noting the targeting of places of worship, educational institutions, medical facilities and other civil infrastructure as a prevalent phenomenon, called for the strict observance of international humanitarian law in all armed conflicts. He pointed to the destabilizing role often played by violent non-State actors in many of the crises around the globe and stressed that: “It is imperative that these groups seek constructive engagement with States, renounce violence and acts of terrorism and enter into legality.” “Peace is only possible if it is wanted,” he underscored, urging the international community to pursue peace as a collective responsibility and “move beyond rhetoric and the tendency to ascribe blame”. Given the tendency in times of conflict to seek military victory, diplomacy must pursue every avenue for negotiation to establish enduring peace.
Foremost among the root causes of war is hunger, he said, yet the tendency to maintain growth in military expenditure prevails. “Pope Francis appeals to rich countries to acknowledge the gravity of so many of their past decisions and determine to forgive the debts of countries that will never be able to repay them,” he underscored. Reiterating Pope Francis’ call for “respect for life”, he voiced hope for an effort by the international community to prohibit universally “the practice of so-called surrogate motherhood”. Also, the dignity of migrants must be upheld, and the trafficking of human beings must be stopped, and traffickers brought to justice. Further, he voiced concern about the poorest countries who contribute the least to climate change, but “carry the greatest burden of its effects”. On the rise of new technologies, he stressed the need to “ensure and safeguard a space for proper human control over choices made by artificial intelligence” and reconsider the development and use of devices like the “so-called ‘lethal autonomous weapons’” and ultimately ban their use.
Turning to conflicts around the world, he called for urgent action towards a just and peaceful resolution in Ukraine, an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and the West Bank, the release of Israeli hostages in Gaza, and urgent humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian population. He condemned all anti-Christian acts perpetrated in Jerusalem by a minority of Jewish individuals and called on the authorities to continue “confronting this ideological deviation firmly and clearly”. In Lebanon, all parties must adhere to international humanitarian law and enter a ceasefire without delay. Peace must be fostered within societies, he stressed, voicing concern about “an increasing tendency to alter constitutions or to modify electoral rules and procedures for the purpose of remaining in power”. On human rights, he said that “it is inconceivable to associate the concept of ‘right’ with the practice of abortion”, and voiced concern about Christians, one in seven of whom are subjected to religious persecution. Turning to multilateralism and UN reform, he called for “the return to sincere and open dialogue” that takes into account the changed context facing the Organization.
WANG YI, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, said that, today, “humanity has once again come to a critical crossroad”, facing a turbulent world where security challenges, imbalanced development and ineffective governance are increasingly prominent. With emerging hotspots of conflicts and geopolitical tensions, the future of this planet has become a cause of concern. Concurrently, he observed, “the aspirations of the Global South nations for modernization have never been stronger”. Noting that the UN embodies people's aspirations worldwide for lasting peace and shared prosperity, he stressed that the Organization’s role should be strengthened. Accordingly, he underscored the need to implement a security architecture that ensures enduring stability, fosters a development paradigm of prosperity and adopts an approach to civilizations that promotes mutual learning. He also called for “a new type of international relations characterized by mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation. In today’s world, the security of all countries is intertwined and “no one can enjoy security alone”, he said, noting that countries must be guided by common security and respect each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
“Achieving modernization is the legitimate right of the people of all countries, not a prerogative of a few,” he continued, advocating for inclusive economic globalization. To this end, he underscored the need to oppose unilateralism and protectionism and help developing countries leap over the developing divide. It is vital to strive to replace the clash of civilizations with mutual learning and reject ideology-based confrontation. All countries — regardless of their size — have their place in a multipolar system, he asserted, opposing hegemonism and power politics. Noting that “an end to the Ukraine crisis remains elusive”, he urged de-escalation and reiterated Beijing’s commitment to promoting peace talks. The question of Palestine is “the biggest wound to human conscience,” causing more casualties with each passing day, he said, emphasizing that “there must be no delay in a comprehensive ceasefire”.
He further underscored that the Korean Peninsula should not experience war again, calling for persistent efforts for de-escalation. “Asia has the wisdom and capability to stabilize the situation,” he stated, noting that China has never opted to be an indifferent spectator. Instead, it has played a more significant part in global governance than ever before. Stressing that sanctions and pressure will not bring monopolistic advantages and suppressing and containing others will not solve problems at home, he urged the United States to completely lift its blockade of and sanctions against Cuba. He further emphasized that Taiwan is an integral part of China’s territory, reiterating that the Cairo Declaration stated explicitly that all the territories Japan had stolen from the Chinese should be restored to his country. “There is no room for ambiguity,” he asserted, adding that “the complete reunification of China will be achieved, and Taiwan will eventually return to the embrace of the mother.” And “no force can stop it”, he added.
MURAT NURTLEU, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, urged: “Having yearly discussions about reforming global institutions is no longer enough. It is time to enact the change our world so desperately needs.” Recalling Kazakhstan’s “Initiative of World Unity for a Just Peace and Harmony” presented in 2023, promoting peace and security through engagement between the Global South and Global North, he underlined that “the voices of middle powers and developing nations are vital in bridging divides and nurturing a more effective international security architecture”. The increasing risk of another nuclear arms race is exacerbating geopolitical polarization, he warned, recalling Kazakhstan’s history of enduring 456 nuclear tests, devastating both people and the land. Voicing grave concern about escalating rhetoric around nuclear threats, he called on all nuclear-capable States to adhere to all related treaties including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
“Another existential threat no nation can afford to ignore is climate change,” he continued, calling on all G-20 countries and development banks to share the burden by “providing green technologies and concessional financing to low- and middle-income countries in line with the Paris Agreement”. Despite accounting for only 1 per cent of emissions, Central Asia will face a 2.5ºC increase in average temperatures by 2050. To that end, his country will host a Regional Climate Summit in 2026. Moreover, water scarcity, threatening food and ecological systems worldwide, will affect up to 30 per cent of the population of the region if unaddressed. As the current Chair of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, Kazakhstan is working with regional partners on a cooperation mechanism for the effective use of water and energy resources in Central Asia, focusing on irrigation hydropower and environmental protection. His country is also the largest landlocked developing country, he said, voicing alarm that geographical constraints prevent these countries from integrating into global trade networks. For its part Kazakhstan will harness synergies between the Belt and Road project, the Global Gateway Initiative and the North-South and Trans-Caspian International Transport Route corridors to transform “our landlocked status into land-linked connectivity,” he declared.
Turning to the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) posing challenges in situations of conflict, data privacy and “information wars”, he called for the UN to take a leading role and establish a UN AI Office to develop ethics and standards for its use. As a bridge for cooperation between East and West, Central Asia is increasingly important in global affairs. With strong relations through the “C5+” dialogue platform, the regional agenda includes developing Afghanistan into a reliable trade partner, he said. Domestically, his country prioritizes human rights, an “antidote” to inequalities that cause instability and conflict, through measures including abolishing the death penalty, instituting a zero-tolerance policy on torture and strengthening national prevention mechanisms. Moreover, as “champion[s] of repatriation of women and children from conflict zones in the Middle East, Kazakhstan will host an International Conference in 2025 on best practices in the field of repatriation and reintegration”, he said.
CHENDA SOPHEA SOK, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cambodia, said the current picture of the world is grim. “Violent armed conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza, Lebanon, Sudan, Myanmar and many other parts of the world rage on, despite efforts to de-escalate them,” he stressed, warning that with intensifying geopolitical tensions, any misstep in various flashpoints may trigger a regional or even global war, potentially involving nuclear weapons. “Military spending has surged across the world, draining resources that could be used to address multiplying non-traditional threats,” he continued, referring to climate change, pandemics, food insecurity, technological disruptions, transnational crime and backsliding on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). “Cambodia hopes for a prompt end to the war between Russia and Ukraine, through diplomacy and dialogue based on equal respect,” he said, commending all efforts to de-escalate the fighting.
Turning to the Palestine-Israel conflict, he said his country remains committed to a two-State solution, condemning all acts of terrorism and calling for a dialogue to stop the ongoing war and the ever-worsening humanitarian crisis in Gaza. He expressed concern over the prospect of an all-out region-wide war in the Middle East against the background of the latest developments in Lebanon. The crisis in Myanmar remains a serious concern, he said, emphasizing the need for humanitarian relief and a Myanmar-owned and Myanmar-led political process aimed at lasting peace and reconciliation. He opposed unilateral coercive measures. “Sanctions and economic blockades disproportionately harm the most vulnerable and impede achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,” he noted, adding that, after years on the list of least developed countries, Cambodia looks forward to its expected graduation from this status by 2029.
Reaffirming that Phnom Penh values multilateralism, the rules-based international order and the principles enshrined in the UN Charter and international law, he urged to revitalize the UN and make it more robust and more proactive. “The UN Security Council needs to be tailored to the twenty-first century and to be effective for today’s tasks, its composition must be more fairly representative,” he said, adding that his country is proud to play a significant role in global peacekeeping. Since 2006, Cambodia has sent over 9,000 of its people to serve in eleven UN missions, including over 800 women, he noted. Supporting relevant adjustments and reforms to increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and promote the agenda of women, peace and security and youth, peace and security, he said that for his country, sustainable and inclusive development means “no one and no place is left behind”.
XAVIER BETTEL, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Luxembourg, highlighted the challenge of upholding the principle of “leaving no one behind” in a world torn apart by multiple conflicts. “How should you explain to someone in Palestine and Lebanon, in Kyiv, in so many different places around the world, that we want to leave no one behind?”m he asked. He went on to say that, for the people demonstrating outside, international institutions have become a “barking dog without teeth”. Stressing that currently there are 60 ongoing conflicts and “about 50 conflicts could start tomorrow”, he asserted: “The whole world is, in fact, if you look geographically, in conflict.”
Turning to the war in Ukraine, he emphasized that organizing peace conferences without the presence of the Russian Federation or China would only mean “moral support” for Ukraine, adding: “If we want to find a solution, then you have to get everybody around the table.” On the situation in the Middle East, he stressed that “there will not be a winner in this war”. Warning that the cycle of hatred between the young people in Israel and Palestine can continue for generations, he urged to restore hope between the young people and find the solution to the conflict quickly, otherwise: “We are training future generations for Hamas and Hizbullah in that region.” More so, he called on Israel to stop placing United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) on a terrorist list, adding that “if we are not reacting to this, it means we are accomplices”. “We need a two-State solution and we need to realize that […] without peace in Palestine there will never be any guaranteed peace for Israel,” he underscored.
Emphasizing the need to respect the rights of women and minorities, particularly in countries where those rights are being rolled back, he urged: “Do not backtrack. The rights that exist for everybody already must be respected.” Voicing concern about how economy seemed “to take the upper hand on the environment”, he stressed the urgent need to act before it is too late, noting that some island nations may disappear due to rising sea levels. Turning to the Security Council reform, he proposed an alternative where a two-thirds majority could overturn a veto, arguing that “having more members in the Security Council would just be expanding the problem”. In closing, he voiced hope for a world where everyone would have the same chances, rights and obligations, irrespective of their colour, religion, gender, sexual orientation or “how much money my parents had”.
ABDOULAYE MAIGA, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of State, Minister for Territorial Administration and Decentralization of Mali, said that, due to terrorist groups and armed groups, his country since 2012 has faced a crisis that has led to the loss of more than half of its territory and many innocent deaths. The allegiance to Al-Qaida of the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, the Algerian GSPC, in September 2006, exacerbated by the reckless intervention of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Libya in 2011 worsened insecurity in Mali, he added, pointing to trafficking of all kinds, money-laundering and “community conflicts manipulated by terrorists and their foreign State sponsors”. The Malian authorities, having noted the failure of the international forces in Mali territory since 2013, launched in 2021 — after the swearing in of Colonel Assimi Goïta, as President of the Transition and Head of State — a vast campaign to equip and reorganize the Defence and Security Forces, as well as a national programme for education on values to enable to the country to “return to our origins” in its legitimate quest for sovereignty, he said.
He detailed achievements in Mali’s political transition, including the adoption of its new Constitution in July 2023. Noting the holding in December 2023 of the Inter-Malian Dialogue for Peace and Reconciliation, he reiterated his Government’s appeal to all Malians to join in the process of reconciliation. Spotlighting Malian Defence and Security Forces’ offensive, he said all regions have been recaptured from terrorist groups, including the Kidal region in November 2023. Terrorist groups have been severely weakened, and the Defence and Security Forces have been deployed throughout the territory and are also continuing to dismantle remaining terrorist networks. Recognizing the limits of a security-based-only response, he said the Government has adopted a comprehensive, integrated strategy aimed at restoring State authority, with political, economic and social development measures, including dialogue with armed groups and the provision of basic social services.
Nonetheless, criminal groups still attempt to undermine Mali’s territorial integrity and terrorize its populations, he said, denouncing foreign State sponsors’ support of those groups. He recalled that, earlier this year, the member States of the Confederation of the States of the Sahel sent a joint letter to the Security Council to condemn Ukrainian authorities' support for international terrorism; denounce the aggression against Mali; and demand that the Council take appropriate measures against the Ukrainian Government. He also criticized France for its acts of aggression against Mali and its involvement in promoting terrorism in the Sahel through armed, economic and media terrorism. He expressed surprise at the fierce hostility from some officials of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) “who are acting on orders of imperialists and neocolonial entities”. The Confederation of States of the Sahel is open to all investors, provided that the partnership benefits the Sahelian populations and State sovereignty is respected. He commended the Russian Federation, China, Türkiye, Iran and many other of Mali's allies for their cooperation.
RETNO LESTARI PRIANSARI MARSUDI, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, said her country cannot “sit back and relax” in the face of the injustice committed against the people of Palestine. “As I speak now, more than 41,000 people in Gaza have been killed, and the situation in the West Bank and Lebanon is deteriorating,” she stated, adding that, yesterday — while Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was in New York — Israel conducted unprecedented massive air attacks on Beirut. Underscoring the need to pressure Israel to come back to a political solution, she said that the Security Council must act to immediately stop Israel from blatantly violating international law. The organ’s mandate is to maintain peace, not to maintain and prolong wars or support the perpetrator of atrocities, she asserted, adding that “inaction means complicity”.
As a member of the Human Rights Council, Indonesia continuously calls for inclusive partnerships in addressing global human rights issues. And amidst regional rivalries, Indonesia pioneered the ASEAN Outlook on Indo-Pacific as a framework for concrete and inclusive cooperation to embrace, not to contain. Moreover, her country has demonstrated that global leadership will never be attained through domination and fear. Calling for “leadership without hegemony”, she stressed that the multilateral system — including the Security Council — should be reformed to amplify the voices of all countries. Without peace, she added, efforts to attain global goals, such as the SDGs, will remain “a dream without reality”. Indonesia is committed to contributing to global peace by being one of the largest troop-contributing countries to UN peacekeeping missions, she said, also spotlighting her country’s proactive role in counterterrorism.
Amid rising geopolitical tensions, which significantly impact global supply chains and the development trajectory of the Global South, Indonesia has taken proactive steps, including holding the second Indonesia-Africa Forum, to enhance cooperation in international supply chains and connectivity. A “winner takes all” or “take it or leave it” mentality should no longer exist when collaboration is the only antidote in addressing the global challenges of today. Her country also hosted the tenth World Water Forum in 2024, she said, citing water as “a crucial element for shared prosperity”. Indonesia also continues to work with ASEAN to restore peace and stability in Myanmar through the implementation of the ASEAN Five-Point Consensus to enable the safe and dignified return of the Rohingya refugees.
SERGEY V. LAVROV, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, said “in the contemporary history of the UN, many ambitious events concluded with loud declarations that were quickly forgotten about”, recalling, among other examples, the United States’ aggression against Iraq following the 2005 World Summit to “end all wars”. The adopted SDGs turned out to be “empty promises in light of the reluctance of the countries of the West to refrain from their neocolonial practices of mining the entire world for their benefit”. It is not too late to revive the UN, but it cannot occur through summits and declarations that are divorced from reality, “rather, it must be done through rebuilding confidence and trust based on the Charter principle of the sovereign equality of all Member States.” The West continues to undermine global trust through unilateral actions, bypassing the UN. Meanwhile, binding Security Council resolutions continue to go unimplemented. The most glaring example is 80 years of consensus on the establishment of a Palestinian State existing peacefully with Israel, scrapped entirely.
“Everyone who still has a sense of compassion is outraged” that the 7 October 2023 terrorist attacks against Israelis are being used to collectively punish Palestinian civilians, he stressed, urging that their killing “with American weapons must immediately be ended”. Another glaring example of terrorism is the recent attacks in Lebanon, “transforming civilian technology into lethal weapons”, he said, calling for an immediately investigation. The evidence indicates Washington, D.C.’s, awareness in their orchestration, though they may deny it as they have denied their involvement in the sabotage of the Nord Stream pipeline — just another example of their interference in the same globalism that they promote. The UN Secretariat must act impartially and avoid playing into the hands of those who scupper cooperation and divide the world “into a flowering garden and the jungle — or those sitting around the table of democracy and those who are on the menu”, he said. Underscoring the track record of countries demanding compliance with their rules, such as the birth of ISIS following the aggression against Iraq, he called all countries to be wary in dealing with the inventors of those rules if they care about their own freedom, especially against a backdrop of an expanding NATO.
Next, warning Europe against following “Anglo-Saxon strategists” into the “suicidal escapade” of defeating his country using the “illegitimate Kyiv neo-Nazi regime”, he said that it is just as senseless to fight with a nuclear Power as it is for Kyiv’s Western backers insisting that there is no alternative to negotiations aside from their “Peace Formula”. Though obsessed with human rights, Western leaders are silent about Kyiv’s racist actions, he said, spotlighting the extermination of Russian culture and language in Ukraine. These are the reasons for his country’s military intervention, he said, and unless they are addressed, peace will not be achievable. “Confrontation and hegemony will not resolve any global problem, they will hold back the objective process of the formation of a multipolar world order that will be based on the equal rights of large and small nations”, respecting human identity equality between men and women and the right of peoples to determine their own fate — all language enshrined in the UN Charter. “Addressing the most complex problems facing all of humanity is something we can only do together taking into account one another’s interestb” and the Global South and the East are speaking up for their rights to decision-making on a global scale, both through many regional organisations and the BRICS [Brazil, Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa] association, which promotes mutually beneficial development, free from the control of dictates. All of these objective processes need to be taken into account in the work of the Group of 20 (G20), where the Group of Seven (G7) “is no longer able to pick the tune”.
ALICIA BÁRCENA IBARRA, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, criticized “neoliberal hegemony” and “extractivist development”, pointing out that those socialize losses, privatize gains, impoverish people and devastate the planet. Yet, despite the return of arms races and wars, the growing extremism and the disregard for democratic values, it is possible to change a “destructive path” with “bravery and courage”. Against this backdrop, she highlighted Mexico’s efforts to build emancipatory alternatives, such as a moral economy that guarantees equal distribution of income and respect for environment. Detailing her country’s recent progress, she spotlighted the lifting out of poverty of over 9.5 million Mexicans with the minimum wage increased by 135 per cent.
Turning to the issue of migration, she said her country has developed a model for human mobility to ensure safe, orderly and regular ways for people to migrate. “Migration is not a problem, but a phenomenon”, she stressed. Rather, problems are the factors forcing people to leave their homes and facing dangers when they cannot find legal ways to migrate. By recognizing the annual contribution of $324 billion for the United States’ economy by over 37 million Mexican migrants, her country’s Government managed to change the narrative on migration and has reduced border clashes by 66 per cent. Noting that Mexico is the first country in the Global South to adopt a feminist foreign policy, she voiced regret that only nine female world leaders spoke at the General Assembly during the high-level week. “The world cannot make headway without half of its population,” she stressed.
On the issues of global security, she sounded the alarm over the growing risk of nuclear war — “the greatest threat that humanity has ever faced” — and called for negotiations to end the conflict in Ukraine, while welcoming the peace initiative by Brazil and China. “We are all losers, apart from the mercenaries of death, apart from those arms companies that are making money out of suffering,” she said, calling for efforts to be redoubled to eliminate nuclear weapons. Mexico is suffering from the flow of more than half a million weapons into its territory every year, she reported, and the arms industry for the negligence must be held accountable. She went on condemn the long-standing economic embargo imposed on Cuba and called on the removal of that country from the List of State Sponsors of Terrorism. Highlighting the historic inauguration of Mexico’s first female president, Claudia Sheinbaum, on 1 October, she said that “equality for women has now arrived”.
ESPEN BARTH EIDE, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, stressed that, for the first time in 79 years, there is a major inter-State war in Europe. “In its war of aggression against Ukraine, Russia is in blatant violation of the very essence of the Charter”, he said, adding that his country stands by Ukraine and wants peace. But, it must be a just peace, in line with the key principles of the UN Charter. “An unjust peace would imply that we, once again, are living in a world where might makes right and where borders can be changed by force,” he emphasized, recalling that even wars have rules, embodied in the Geneva Conventions. Pointing to these rules, he said: “It is equally important that we speak out if our traditional friends violate them.”
Turning to Hamas’ heinous terror attack on Israel in 2023, he condemned it and underscored that Israel has a right to defend itself against terrorism. “At the same time, Israel, like any other State, is bound by international humanitarian law,” he continued, recalling that much of Gaza has been turned into rubble and at least 41,000 people have been killed, with many more injured. Since Norway was among the very first Western countries to call for a ceasefire in Gaza and has expressed great concern about the severe limitations on humanitarian access and the shocking number of UN staff, aid workers and journalists killed, he emphasized: “We stood on UNRWA’s side when it was subjected to smear and defamation.” Pointing out that, in the West Bank, illegal Israeli settlements are expanding at an alarming pace and Lebanon has seen its deadliest days in decades, he warned about the brink of a major regional war.
He then spotlighted Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s address to the Assembly the day before, observing: “His core message was that we all have to choose — either we are with Israel or we are with Iran and its proxies. We have seen this film before. I didn't like the ending.” He referred to the events in New York 22 years ago, when, “in response to the terrorist attacks on this very city, another leader stated that we were either with him or with the terrorists”. He called on those States that have not yet has done so to recognize the State of Palestine and to allow it to become a full member of the UN. He also reiterated his country’s support for Security Council reform. “Both permanent and elected seats should be added and the historical injustice to Africa should be mended,” he said, adding that the use of the veto should be limited rather than expanded. Emphasizing that central to the Pact of the Future are robust commitments to gender equality and women's rights, he concluded: “When a new Secretary-General shall be elected, we must ensure that she has the tools she needs to help us strategically deliver the noble goals we have agreed upon.”
SUBRAHMANYAM JAISHANKAR, Minister for External Affairs of India, citing global challenges that have led to a fractious, polarized and frustrated world, asked: “If the world is in such a state, this body must ask itself: how has this come to pass?” “The problems arise from a combination of structural shortcomings, political calculations, naked self-interest and yes, disregard for those left behind,” he said, and thus Member States must seriously and purposefully address the challenges at hand to effect change. India has sought to respond in many ways, foremost by focusing on the issues of the vulnerable, women, farmers and youth, as well as by fashioning targeted policies and initiatives for their betterment. Citing assured access to piped water, electricity, cooking gas and new homes, as well as a narrowing gender gap in health, education and the workplace, he noted that a third-term Government has also prioritized skilling its youth. Further, it is expanding employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, including through stronger training and large-scale financial incentives. Small businesses have received 495 million Mudra loans in the last decade, with a majority allocated to women.
India is also “creating templates that are replicable elsewhere” through its digital delivery or enhancing the quality of governance and public services, he said. “A digital public infrastructure and a people’s pharmacy are today examples of what India can readily offer” and “an alternative vision where technology is used to empower, not to dominate”. To encourage the Global South to voice its shared concerns and come together, his country has convened three Global South Summits, the most recent in August, he said. Further, India is undertaking projects in 78 nations, providing resources to neighbours, as well as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. The transformative potential and impact of the digital is evident in the daily lives of Indians who benefit from the efficient and large-scale delivery of public benefits, from nutritional support and housing to energy and health. Detailing other digital advancements, he said: “That is India’s experience and India’s relevance.” “Such leap-frogging possibilities, coupled with people centric policies and visionary leadership, can be real game-changers,” he added.
Noting the unfairness of the current globalization model, which has caused many to get left behind, he stressed: “There are economic answers, just as there are social ones.” “The UN has always maintained that peace and development go hand in hand. Yet, when challenges to one have emerged, due regard has not been given to the other,” he said. While many countries get left behind due to circumstances beyond their control, some make conscious choices with disastrous consequences, he said, pointing to Pakistan, its neighbour, as a “premier example”. “A dysfunctional nation coveting the lands of others must be exposed and countered.” Pakistan’s cross-border terrorism policy will never succeed and can have no expectation of impunity, he stressed, emphasizing that the only solution is for Pakistan to vacate the illegally occupied Indian territory and abandon its “long-standing attachment to terrorism”. The global order is inherently pluralistic and diverse. The UN began with 51 members and expanded to 193. “The world has changed profoundly and so have its concerns and opportunities,” he said, emphasizing that the UN must the central platform for finding common ground. But, “it cannot be, by remaining anachronistic”, he added.
VIVIAN BALAKRISHNAN, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore, observed that the world is in “an acutely dangerous phase”, and civilians in multiple trouble spots are paying a terrible price. The risks of miscalculation and escalation have sharply increased, notably in the Middle East, Ukraine, Sudan and the Korean Peninsula. The lack of trust among major Powers and the deficit of global leadership makes it difficult to find peaceful solutions to ongoing conflicts. And a reformed UN is essential for global solutions on almost every issue confronting the international community — from peace and security to climate change, from the ocean to outer space, and from poverty to food insecurity. Underscoring that recent violations of international law must not become normalized, he said that the ongoing war in Ukraine exemplifies a flagrant violation of the UN Charter.
“For small States, multilateralism is not an option but an existential necessity,” he stated, expressing support for the International Court of Justice, which is paramount for upholding the rule of law and protecting the interests of all countries. In addition, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea is crucial for an island State dependent on trade like Singapore, he said, adding that it provides a foundation for coordinating efforts on issues such as sea level rise, plastic pollution, loss of biodiversity and ocean acidification. Spotlighting the New Agenda for Peace, he underlined the need to strengthen the UN’s role in promoting peace and security, particularly in preventive diplomacy, mediation and conflict prevention. “Such efforts are urgently needed to save civilian lives and prevent catastrophes,” he added.
Gravely concerned with the deteriorating humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the sheer scale of human suffering, Singapore has contributed over S$17 million in humanitarian aid and donations for Gaza, including through the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and UNRWA. Emphasizing the need for the safe and unhindered provision of humanitarian aid to all civilians in need, he called for an immediate ceasefire and the immediate, unconditional and safe release of all hostages. He also underscored the need to accelerate collective efforts in combating climate change, noting that — like all small island States — Singapore is vulnerable to its impacts, especially sea level rise. It is also vital to transform global governance institutions by making them more representative and responsive, particularly to the needs of small States and developing countries.
BRUNO EDUARDO RODRÍGUEZ PARRILLA, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, quoting his President, said: “History will not forgive the indifferent. We will not be among them,” adding that the genocide against the Palestinian people must end unconditionally and without further delay. Israel and the United States have put the world in an imminent risk of conflict and aggressions against Lebanon, Syria and other countries in the region will have unpredictable consequences. Worse, as conflicts abound globally based on military doctrines of domination, “the risk of a nuclear catastrophe is real and imminent”. In 2023, military spending reached a record $2.44 trillion dollars, including for the creation of new nuclear weapons. Peace will be impossible without development, he said, recalling broken promises of official development assistance (ODA) from developed countries, figures representing just 0.37 per cent of their national incomes.
As the feasibility of the SDGs has vanished, the fortunes of the billionaires have ballooned, he continued, adding that, with a tax on billionaires, 2 billion people could be brought out of poverty. This structural problem is imposed by an imperialist system, but the answer is not to undermine the United Nations in promoting sustainable development for all. In a similar vein, if the unsustainable production and consumption of capitalism remains unchanged, a 1.5ºC increase in temperatures will be inevitable. “Responsibilities should be shared by all but not all should bear the same responsibilities,” he said. The Global North will have a new possibility to close the climate financing and pay their debts at the upcoming United Nations Climate Change Conference in Baku. The Global South will have a responsibility to guarantee development and social justice. The solution will inevitably include writing off foreign debt, already paid several times over. A new co-existence among nations based on solidarity and international cooperation must replace that which is based on dispossession, war, occupation or financial and military hegemony.
The United States’ blockade of Cuba continues to impact the lives of Cubans negatively and constitutes a violation of international law. Moreover, the inclusion of Cuba on a list of countries that allegedly sponsor terrorism is illegitimate given that country’s own State Department recognizing that Cuba is fully cooperative with anti-terror efforts. Anti-Cuban politicians who do not represent the majority of the United States population continue to influence policy. Nonetheless Cuba will advocate for constructive relations with the United States. Among other comments on global affairs, he called for a diplomatic solution to the war in Ukraine, voicing further support for Brazil and China’s efforts to that end.
ENRIQUE A. MANALO, Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Philippines, describing the UN as “the ground for States to find convergence amidst crises and conflict”, said the Organization must rise to the occasion. For that, the reform of the Security Council and General Assembly is needed, including the enlargement of the Council’s membership and improvement of its working methods. He also emphasized the need for transforming the international financial architecture to achieve just and inclusive growth and to ensure that governance of new spheres of human activity, including artificial intelligence (AI), “places human dignity as the priority”. The rising numbers of those forcibly displaced — in Ukraine, Gaza and other places —- beg for a deeper sense of collective responsibility, he emphasized, highlighting his country’s support for humanitarian emergencies through UNRWA and other bodies.
He detailed his country’s long history of contributing to UN peacekeeping operations since 1963, including the deployment over 14,000 troops in 21 UN peacekeeping and special political missions. On that matter, he called for bolstering the UN Peacebuilding Fund and supporting Security Council resolutions. Pointing to his country’s acute climate vulnerability, he also described it as one of the “staunchest proponents for strengthening climate and disaster risk resilience”. Against this backdrop, he called on developed nations to fulfil their commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on climate change.
Turning to the issue of sustainable development, he spotlighted his country’s progress in reducing poverty by nearly 3 per cent between 2021 and 2023. As the Philippines moves towards upper-middle-income status, he urged international financial institutions to redesign frameworks to better support middle-income countries, which represent 75 per cent of the global population. “If multilateralism is to thrive, all States must adhere to the rule of law,” he said, stressing that his country will continue to assert its sovereignty in the South China Sea through peaceful means. Therefore, he rejected the narrative of depicting the South China Sea as a theatre of major Power rivalry. “The future of the Asia Pacific is being shaped not by one or two Powers, but by all States therein,” he emphasized.
LUCA BECCARI, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Political Affairs, International Economic Cooperation and Digital Transition of San Marino, voiced concern about the unprecedented rise in global military expenditure and the increase in dangerous nuclear rhetoric. He commended the Secretary-General for emphasizing the necessity to eliminate nuclear weapons in the New Agenda for Peace and reaffirmed San Marino’s commitment to a world free of nuclear weapons. Turning to the war of aggression against Ukraine, he reaffirmed his country’s unwavering support for Ukraine’s political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. In the true spirit of multilateral and international cooperation, San Marino took part in the Summit on Peace in Ukraine in Switzerland last June, he added.
He went on to condemn the 7 October 2023 terrorist attacks and called for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages. However, while San Marino recognizes Israel’s right to defend itself under humanitarian and international law, it cannot remain silent amid the deaths of more than 40,000 civilians, most of them children and women. He called for an immediate ceasefire and a return to dialogue to address Israel’s legitimate concerns and Palestinians’ legitimate aspirations. “A lasting and sustainable peace based on the two-State solution is the only long-term option for peace,” he stressed, adding his support for the admission of Palestine to the UN as a full member towards that end. Recalling the May General Assembly resolution, which upgrades Palestine’s rights at the UN as Observer State, he urged the Security Council to favorably consider Palestine’s full membership.
Turning to the concerning issues of international law violations, he added his support for the work of the International Criminal Court and for initiatives such as the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group’s Code of Conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. As well, climate action must be strengthened; San Marino was committed to decarbonizing the global economy by 2050 and halting and reversing biodiversity loss by 2030. Calling for a stronger focus on collective and effective global solutions, he said that global governance must become more inclusive and accountable by providing more space for civil society and the private sector. To that end a more inclusive and equitable international financial architecture is also needed. On UN reform, he said the Council must be more democratic, transparent, efficient and accountable. Encouraging continuous dialogue among States, he stressed that “overcoming the respective initial positions is essential to negotiate the broadest agreement possible”.
MOHAMAD HASAN, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, recalled that nations emerged from the dust of the Second World War with a shared goal to build a safer world. However, for many, it has only become a deadlier world, in which war can be waged remotely and with impunity — a world in which a drone strike can fatally interrupt a lesson in a school, a surgery in a hospital or a convoy delivering humanitarian aid. “It is a world in which the mighty continue to silence the meek with far greater weapons than before,” he said, spotlighting the situation in Gaza, where the mechanisms of the Security Council have been abused to enable mass atrocities. “Our failure to establish a ceasefire is no longer justifiable,” he asserted, citing the willingness to reform as “a matter of life and death for countless innocent people”. The Israeli regime has itself declared its intent to wipe out an entire population. This is, without question, a genocide, he said, demanding that the Council impose an immediate arms embargo against that country.
As Malaysia stands ready to assume the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) chair in 2025, he recognized the Association’s driver’s seat in the Asia Pacific region. Noting that his country’s leadership will focus on the region’s drive for future readiness, he underscored the importance of reinforcing global aspirations, inclusive and people-driven policies and future-oriented mechanisms. Amid the emergence of multilateral pacts affecting the region, Malaysia will aim to fortify ASEAN’s centrality to prevent the region from becoming entrapped in unnecessary geopolitical rivalry or possible escalation. ASEAN’s centrality must also involve managing the most critical issue of the South China Sea as this body of water — rich in resources and carrying vital shipping lanes — has become a flashpoint of rising geopolitical tensions.
He further underscored that the countries of the Global South have continued to be marginalized and remain underrepresented on numerous fronts, including global socioeconomic development, climate mitigation efforts, education, health and infrastructure development. International mechanisms fail to adapt to current realities, often isolating and penalizing developing countries and placing the burden of environmental guilt on them. The lack of infrastructure, technology and resources has prevented developing countries from fully engaging in international systems. Citing equitable access to financing for development as one of the primary challenges, he said innovative and new development financing models that drive sustainability, conservation, climate action and the achievement of the SDGs should be part of new multilateral solutions. The countries of the Global South hold massive potential to further the pursuit of peace and justice worldwide, he observed, adding: “The Global South demands your attention.”
BADR AHMED MOHAMED ABDELATTY, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, declared that the international system’s very existence is threatened due to inequality and growing recourse to double standards. In the face of multiple conflicts and crises, he laid out a vision to restore trust, credibility and combating double standards in the multilateral system, adding that “first, we must recognize that there is no alternative to the multilateral system”. The year-long Israeli aggression is a stain on the international community and its institutions which have failed to do the bare minimum to end it. The top priority is to stop the bloodshed immediately and to prevent any attempts resolve the Palestinian question through forced displacement. Though Egypt, the United States and Qatar have worked to mediate the conflict, Israel has thwarted all attempts, he said, reaffirming support for the establishment of a unified Palestinian State along the 1967 lines with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Genuine participation is required for multilateralism, he said, voicing support not only Security Council reform providing African and Arab countries with permanent seats, but also of international financial architecture and financing institutions. The growing sovereign debt of developing countries must be addressed. Possible solutions include strengthening existing mechanisms, developing new ones and debt swaps. “Economic justice can only be done if we place the priority on Africa’s development,” he said, voicing support for the African Union’s Agenda 2063. National ownership of climate projects guarantees that domestic priorities align with the SDGs, ensuring that the green transition is equitable in line with eradicating poverty. Highlighting the global water crisis affecting Egypt, he said that while his country is heavily reliant on the Nile for resources, Ethiopia unilaterally decided to begin operations on the Renaissance Dam in total disregard for those who live downriver and the 13 years of negotiations. “Egypt will not tolerate any existential threats,” he warned.
No region is more affected by conflict than Africa and the Middle East, he continued. Meanwhile, the Security Council continues to pass resolutions establishing humanitarian operations while it remains unable to stop the violence itself. Highlighting multiple conflicts surrounding his country’s borders, he said that Egypt is committed to address their root causes and maintain peace, namely through preserving the territorial integrity of States without external interference. In that same vein, he voiced support for a resolution to the crisis in Sudan and Libya through political means to preserve both the integrity and the institutions of the State — the latter of which must hold parliamentary elections as soon as possible. Committed to its responsibilities addressing humanitarian crises in the region, Egypt hosts over 10 million refugees currently. Limits do exist however, he said, calling on the international community to mobilize the funds and resources to meet the needs of refugees.
PRINCE FAISAL BIN FARHAN AL-SAUD, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, voicing concern over the global trend of crisis management rather than “finding concrete solutions”, warned against the selective application of international law and political polarization. Urging greater dialogue and cooperation between States to strengthen international peace and security, he rejected crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people “who have been suffering for decades”. Describing ongoing “bombing, murder and destruction” as a humanitarian catastrophe, he called for an end to the Israeli aggression.
Against this backdrop, he welcomed the recent General Assembly resolution recognizing Palestine as fulfilling all conditions for a full membership and praised Norway, Spain, Ireland, Slovenia and Armenia for recognizing the Palestine State. Detailing his country’s financial aid for Palestine and UN humanitarian agencies, he recalled the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice that confirmed the illegal nature of the Israeli presence in the occupied Palestinian territories. “The prevalence of impunity, the lack of respect of legal obligations is encouraging Israel to continue its escalation,” he warned, also calling for the stability of Lebanon to be preserved. Turning to broader regional issues, he noted the restoration of relations with Iran and Syria aimed at promoting peace and stability in the region. He further underscored the importance of finding peaceful solutions in Yemen and Sudan, while stressing that Afghanistan “cannot be left by the wayside”. On the war in Ukraine, he urged that the “repercussions” of this crisis be contained, reiterating his country’s readiness to continue its mediation efforts.
Highlighting his country’s Vision 2030, which seeks to empower women and youth and build bridges with the world, he highlighted Saudi Arabia’s commitment to achieve energy security, ensure stability in international oil markets and guarantee security in the supply chains. On climate change, he said his country adopted a holistic approach to the energy transition and pledged to support Africa’s climate efforts with a contribution of $50 billion. Spotlighting initiatives like the Green Saudi Arabia Initiative and the Green Middle East Initiative, he described investments in reducing carbon emissions and preserving natural resources. Additionally, he reported that not only would Saudi Arabia be hosting the COP16 [Conference of the Parties] of the United Nations Convention Against Desertification, but that it was establishing an international organization for water resources.
MULAMBO HAMAKUNI HAIMBE, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Zambia, said that multilateralism is the only viable approach to solving regional and international challenges, adding: “The creation of the United Nations 80 years ago provided new hope.” Like many other developing countries, Zambia is predominantly import-dependent, he noted, observing that the impact of conflicts in some parts of the world — resulting in disruptions, soaring prices and increased cost of living — did not spare it. In 2023 and 2024, his Government held the Chair of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation. While the security and political situation in the region remains stable, he highlighted “pockets of security challenges” in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cabo Delgado Province in Mozambique and called on States to support peacebuilding.
In 2024, Zambia experienced the worst drought in recent years that adversely affected agriculture and energy and slowed down the country’s economic growth, he reported, adding: “This year, about 50 per cent of Zambia’s population was at risk of food insecurity.” Noting that developing countries face a risk of debt distress, he underscored the need for an effective debt-workout mechanism that supports payment suspensions, longer lending terms and lower interest rates. He also called for further reforms to streamline the existing Group of Twenty (G20) Framework for Debt Restructuring in enhancing certainty and reducing the time it takes to conclude the process. Aggressive tax avoidance and evasion have a corrosive effect on financial integrity and he called for conclusion of negotiations on the UN Framework Convention on International Tax Cooperation. He also underscored the need for international cooperation to support developing countries in integrating technology. The Global Digital Compact is designed to close the digital gap, he added.
To reap the demographic dividend, Zambia has been investing in youth, that currently stands at 82 per cent below the age of 35. With its President being the African Union Champion on ending child marriage, his country’s campaign to end child marriage by 2030 “is growing from strength to strength”. Committed to promoting human rights, Zambia is a candidate to the UN Human Rights Council for 2026-2028. Turning to the Security Council reform, he said: “The time has come for the Security Council to be representative, democratic and accountable to all Member States, irrespective of status.” Since Africa constitutes the second largest bloc of the UN’s membership, proposals to reform the Council should heed Africa’s call as presented in the Common Africa Position and enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
MAXIM RYZHENKOV, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belarus, said that the Charter of the UN “is not perfect — just like we are not perfect. But it’s the best we have”. The establishment of the Group of Friends in Defense of the Charter was due to a number of countries not abiding by the norms enshrined in the Charter. The West’s main interest is to maintain their dominance and the prosperity of their elites by exploiting other nations and their resources, while employing the principle of “divide and conquer”. But if a State dares to enact their own policy to protect their people and tries to throw off the yoke of external control over their resources, the West subject them to sanctions and pressure. Today, about 40 countries with a population of 2.5 billion are under illegal restrictive measures imposed by the United States and the European Union, he observed.
From the point of view of the “collective West”, 72 per cent of people live in what the West calls “autocracies”, while 20 years ago this figure stood at 46 per cent, he noted, adding: “Free countries in the Global South” — who do not accept sanctions — experience the “democratization” forced upon them. Spotlighting a “new majority” where new ideas and new projects are springing up — strictly peaceful — he highlighted the Belt and Road Initiative and the initiative of the Russian Federation and Belarus to draft a Eurasian Charter of Multipolarity and Diversity in the twenty-first century, geared towards establishing a unified international community in which the fate of all the people is united. “If we placed more trust in the UN, most peace-loving initiatives would be born and would grow within the Organization, not outside it,” he said.
Noting that the UN should throw off the dictate of a number of States that are feeling “exceptional”, he stressed: “The UN is all of us.” He recalled that, in 2023, the Western countries waged a “dirty campaign” to prevent Belarus from being elected to serve on the Security Council and underscored the need for fair Council reform. “The voice of the Global South on the Security Council is our voice,” he added, stressing that the UN should be a voice of States without it being diluted by non-Government bodies. Also reporting that his country’s president, Aleksandr Lukashenko, put forward an initiative of a Global Dialogue on Security, he stated: “We must breathe the spirit of San Francisco into the UN’s lungs. That is the spirit that gave life to our Organization.”
THÓRDÍS KOLBRÚN REYKFJÖRD GYLFADÓTTIR, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iceland, stated: “We cannot build a future fit for our grandchildren with systems built for our grandparents.” However, the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine marks a flagrant breach of the UN Charter and Moscow’s repeated threats of using nuclear weapons are reckless and dangerous. “It is Mr. Putin who has concocted a false narrative around his invasion of Ukraine’s territory,” she stated. It is in the Kremlin’s power to end it at any time by withdrawing its forces from internationally recognized Ukrainian territory.
Affirming that “Israel’s right to exist is beyond debate” and calling for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages, she also said that no country is above the law. The Palestinian people’s right to self-determination is also beyond debate. In the current conflict, there have been reports of civilian infrastructure and hospitals being used for purposes that can deprive them of their protection under international humanitarian law, and this is unacceptable — as are the unacceptable losses of civilian lives. She called on all parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire and avoid any action that could lead to further escalation.
As one of only 19 women speaking from the podium during the opening session, she commented: “I thought we had come further than this.” Yet, in certain countries, little girls and women are not allowed to go to school or laugh in public and women are not allowed to take part in conversations outside of their homes. She thus voiced support for the cross-regional action announced this week in New York to hold the Taliban to account for their grave violations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). She also affirmed that, if elected to the Human Rights Council, Iceland will include LGBTI+ rights among its list of priorities. Regarding climate change, the United Nations has a proven record, primarily with the Convention for the Law of the Sea. However, the Law is being undermined, including in the South China Sea. All Member States must honour their commitments and act in accordance with that treaty, she stressed.
SAYYID BADR BIN HAMAD BIN HAMOOD ALBUSAIDI, Foreign Minister of Oman, underlining the use of legitimate and peaceful means to resolve conflicts, called for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of hostilities in Gaza, Lebanon and the Red Sea region. “We emphasize the need to address the root causes of these conflicts by ending the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories and achieving justice for the Palestinian people, based on a two-State solution,” he stressed. He went on to underscore the need to grant Palestine full membership in the United Nations and to end the genocidal policies carried out by Israeli occupational forces against Palestinian people.
Highlighting his country’s social protection programmes, he said they demonstrate the commitment to sustainable development and align with global best practices, while providing essential educational and health services. More so, the country’s strong emphasis on empowering youth — “the cornerstone of the future and the key to sustainable development” — has enabled the Government to create opportunities that enable young people to apply their skills and contribute to building a brighter future. Oman is also committed to tackling climate change by reducing emissions and investing in renewable energy projects, guided by its Net-Zero Carbon Strategy for 2050, which includes clean energy initiatives and nature-based solutions, he said.
Welcoming the adoption of the Pact for the Future, he commended global efforts toward enhancing international cooperation to address challenges. “We urge all Member States to commit to implementing this charter and working towards its vision and goals through fruitful cooperation and knowledge exchange,” he said, describing the document as “as a path towards achieving a better, safer and more prosperous future for generations to come”.
LARS LOKKE RASMUSSEN, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, said it is utterly unacceptable that a permanent member of the Council continues to violate the most basic principles of the Charter. “Wars of aggression and altering borders is — and should remain — a thing of the past,” he said, adding that Denmark will stand by Ukraine. The Summit on Peace, held recently in Switzerland, clearly showed the strong global support for peace based on the Charter. “We must all use our influence to further the cause of peace. But it must be a peace that does not reward the aggressor for his brute use of force,” he said. “Otherwise we undermine the principles on which the UN was founded.”
Since Hamas’ horrendous 7 October 2023 attacks on Israel, its terrorism has sparked a downward spiral of human suffering and regional instability, he continued, with a real risk of an all-out regional war that would affect everyone. The international community should be thinking about a promising future for the region, based on a two-State solution. Further, people are dying and suffering from many other conflicts, he reported, including in Sudan, and the humanitarian consequences for the civilian population with more than 10 million people displaced. As well, there is an urgent need for political dialogue and halting conflicts in Yemen, Haiti, Syria, Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of Congo. “The list tragically goes on. And in the wake of our collective inability to stop the wars — the respect for international law is slowly undermined,” he said.
He went on to say that the Pact of the Future reaffirmed Member States commitment to the Charter and outlined a clear direction towards a transformed system of global governance. While the existing system has enabled nations to lift people out of poverty, after 80 years, it needs a serious update, including stronger representation of African countries in the Bretton Woods institutions. At the same time, levels of development assistance to the poorest countries must be sustained and commitments honoured. Denmark remains a member of an exclusive club of countries that meet the UN target of providing 0.7 per cent of their gross national income for official development assistance. “It’s a good club. We invite others to join,” he said. In addition, Denmark in June was elected to the Council for 2025-2026, he said, noting that the Council needs to be more accountable, reflect the contemporary world and respond to security concerns. It also needs to be expanded, with more permanent and more elected members. “And we wish to limit the use of the veto,” he added.
MARIS SANGIAMPONGSA, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, said that when the UN was founded seven decades ago, “we did not envision challenges from technological disruptions, pandemics and climate crisis.” The Organization must remain relevant. For the UN to truly sustain and strengthen peace and security, Member States must uphold their disarmament and non-proliferation obligations. Recognizing that various flashpoints around the globe continue to challenge the credibility of the Organization in resolving conflicts, he said that Thailand faces regional challenges caused by the situation in Myanmar. “We wish to see a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar,” he stressed, spotlighting the continuous work of ASEAN and its Five-Point Consensus. To that end, Thailand is stepping up humanitarian assistance through the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management.
His country has also been sharing its locally-driven and people-centred development approach — the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy — to advance SDGs, he continued. This is the best practice in SDGs localization. Calling for a reform of the international financial architecture, he said that Thailand’s aspiration to become a member of BRICS [Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa] and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is driven by its desire to build bridges in promoting North-South development cooperation. Also noting that his country is among the most affected by climate change, he observed: “Climate disasters have taught us that failure to address this matter will delay the achievement of the SDGs.” For this reason, the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction is crucial.
Reiterating Thailand’s commitment to human rights for all, he spotlighted the country’s candidature to the Human Rights Council for 2025-2027. “At the Council, we will serve as a bridge builder to connect different perspectives,” he said. In pursuit of creating a safe and secure society for all, Thailand has adopted the Marriage Equality Act and continued advocating for universal health coverage and a pandemic treaty. In addition, the country is currently serving as a Chair of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Agenda. Recalling that 78 years ago, Thailand looked at the UN as a guarantor of a more peaceful and prosperous future, he said that, today, the country carried onward the same belief of the United Nations that is “a pioneer of a prevailing peace”.
JEYHUN BAYRAMOV, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, said that a reinvigorated and reformed multilateral system with the UN at its core must be underpinned by the non-selective application of universally accepted norms and principles of international law. Recalling that the Summit of the Future was a renewal of Member States’ common commitment to international law, the Charter, multilateralism and international cooperation and the Pact a blueprint for building a better, more sustainable and prosperous world for everyone, he stressed: “It is time for our collective commitments to turn into real and decisive action.”
As host of the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP29) in November 2024, Azerbaijan will work to foster a collaborative spirit to tackle climate challenges as a common commitment and moral duty, he said, noting that the Conference’s primary expectation is agreement on a fair and ambitious New Collective Quantified Goal on climate finance. “This will be the first major climate finance goal after adopting the Paris Agreement, and we have been working tirelessly to support the parties in landing a deal,” he added. More so, COP29 will also be an opportunity to set differences aside and contribute to global peace and the climate agenda. To that end, Azerbaijan introduced a flagship COP29 Truce Initiative, embedded in the Joint Solemn Appeal announced a few days ago. The end of armed conflict with Armenia and the restoration of Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity has created a substantially new environment in the South Caucasus. “For the first time since decades, stability has been achieved on the ground, de facto peace is established,” he said.
Along with the inter-State process of normalization, Azerbaijan has internally embarked on widespread post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, he reported. This aims to ensure the rights of hundreds of thousands of Azerbaijanis to eventually exercise their violated right to safe and dignified returns to their homes. Yet the massive contamination of Azerbaijan territory with landmines and other explosive devices remains a significant obstacle. Since the end of the conflict in 2020, 377 individuals, including civilians, have fallen victim to landmines. With this in mind, Azerbaijan has introduced a national goal, SDG-18, focusing on mine action. Reaffirming Azerbaijan’s commitment to international peace and security and investing in international solidarity and cooperation, he stated: “We remain to be a strong proponent of combined efforts to overcome challenges and pave the way for a brighter future for ourselves and the generations to come.”
AMERY BROWNE, Minister for Foreign and CARICOM Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago, expressed deep concern over the ongoing war on Gaza, stating “only someone absolutely bereft of humanity would think that it is lawful and just, and even godly to respond to atrocities committed on one awful day of terror, by in turn committing atrocities after atrocities.” He asked how the major Powers would have reacted if innocent civilians including women, children and United Nations staff were being killed at this record rate in the developed world. Citing the “chilling message” that a Palestinian child is less worthy of life, he stressed: the people of his country and of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) are not of that view. Joining the call for an immediate, full, and complete ceasefire, and for the unconditional release of every single hostage, he reported that Trinidad and Tobago has recognized the State of Palestine.
Reporting on the scourge of the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons in his region, he welcomed efforts by partners including the United States to help solve this deadly challenge “which respects no borders”. Voicing deep concern at the humanitarian and security crisis affecting Haiti, which should be held aloft as the first State to end slavery, he acknowledged the central need for an Indigenous, Haitian-led, Haitian-owned solution, supported by the United Nations and the international community. He welcomed the appointment of an interim Prime Minister and Cabinet and commended the Kenyan Government for its deployment and leadership of the Multinational Security Support Mission and the States that contributed to that operation, including Jamaica, the Bahamas and several others in his region. he United States has contributed the lion’s share of funding, with Canada stepping up as well — but some relatively wealthy countries have either contributed drips and drabs or nothing at all.
“The brutality of our colonial experience, the trauma of which still affects us to this day”, he went on to say, contributed significantly to underdevelopment. “Our foreparents […] blood and sweat and tears and labour were extracted to build empires, and beautiful castles, and bridges, and treasures — which some of us pay money today to visit, and photograph and admire.” Calling for restitution for those “historical evil injustices and crimes against humanity”, he noted that last year, Trinidad and Tobago appointed a reconstituted National Committee on Reparations to support the CARICOM Reparations Commission and its work with the African Union and other like-minded bodies. Turning to climate change, he called for accessible, adequate, and predictable funding, requiring operationalization and capitalization of the loss and damage fund. Further, he expressed full solidarity with Cuba, renewing the call for the unconditional lifting of the unjust economic, commercial and financial embargo. Additionally, its designation as a State sponsor of terrorism is unjust and should be removed.
FRANCIS FONSECA, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Belize, stressing that “the self-determination of a people is sacrosanct”, noted that through the exercise of this right, nations enjoy the privilege of sitting in the General Assembly’s Hall. Belize — a member of the Alliance of Small Island States — is one of the 39 countries that has been on the front lines of the climate change. However, the genesis of this crisis laid with the industrialized nations. Emphasizing that G-20 accounts for 80 per cent of global emissions, he added: “This is a tale of two worlds; but we only have one planet to share.” It is important that the growth of the G-20 economies be calibrated to a world where small island developing States also have a secure future. “Our people have gone beyond their duty to protect and preserve our environment, yet some are being forced to relocate from their homelands,” he added.
Recalling that the UN “rose up from the ashes of war to restore faith in fundamental human rights”, he stressed that all Member States have a duty to give effect to these words. Belize is working through the Caribbean Community to reinforce and strengthen Haiti, while also contributing personnel to the Multinational Security Support Mission. Also stressing that Cuba must be removed from the list of State sponsors of terrorism, he said that this arbitrary and unilateral designation created barriers to global cooperation in the region. He further called for the eradication of the system of colonial domination of the Palestinian people and the apartheid imposed upon them.
“We have adopted a rescue plan to steer the SDGs back on course. We have a Pact for the Future,” he continued. However, small island developing States must be at the table in global economic and international financial institutions. “Belize is moving ahead. We are on a transformative development trajectory” he reported, adding that the country has “dramatically” improved its credit profile through the Belize Blue Bond Project — a debt marine conservation swap. In partnership with the United States, it has signed a five-year $125 million grant agreement with the Millennium Challenge Corporation to reduce poverty. Also, the Belize Education Upliftment Project “Together we rise” is a key example in ensuring that every child has access to quality education. “We are aggressively closing the digital divide,” he declared.
OLUSHEGUN ADJADI BAKARI, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Benin, noted that although Africa is often far removed from the origin of global crises, it is nonetheless deeply affected. The Sahel region is the scene of growing tensions, exacerbated by decisions taken without the consent of Africans. This instability seriously compromises sustainable development; even more worrying, some external forces seek to import their geopolitical rivalries into the region. Such interference feeds the breeding ground for terrorism. He reaffirmed commitment to African unity, particularly in West Africa, with a historic responsibility to preserve the centuries-old brotherhood that unites those peoples. Further, he called on the international community to intensify efforts to restore stability through dialogue, whether in the Middle East, Ukraine, the Great Lakes region, Sudan, Libya or Haiti.
Despite such hotbeds of tension, he stressed: “We must never lose sight of another major challenge that threatens the future of our world — poverty in all its forms.” Five years before the 2030 deadline, it is painfully clear that the SDGs will not be achieved. “However, we must not give up the fight,” he stated, as Africa is the future of the world. In a few decades, the continent will be home to a quarter of humanity, with its young people and natural resources being an indispensable asset for the future of the planet. In 25 years, he asked, will the international community still be debating access to drinking water, electricity, health and education — or will every African live with dignity? Benin has initiated major reforms in education, health, or infrastructure and the international community must recognize these efforts and support African nations working for their future.
For Africa to take flight, he noted that it must also reconcile with its history. As it is impossible to grasp the essence of Africa without fully embracing its beliefs, traditions, and civilization, Benin — the motherland of Vodun culture — has taken the initiative to correct negative perceptions. However, respect for Africa does not stop at recognizing its past — it also involves a modern, action-oriented Pan-Africanism committed to reducing poverty and building a prosperous continent. Noting that it is impossible to advocate African unity when it is easier for a European to travel to Africa than for an African himself, he emphasized that Benin has made a bold choice by removing visas for all African nationals. Brothers and sisters in the diaspora, forcibly uprooted during the dark days of the transatlantic slave trade, must find their place within the African community. “We say to them: “Africa is your home, and we await you with open arms.” As 2024 marks the end of the International Decade for People of African Descent, he announced that Benin took a historic step by adopting a law granting Beninese nationality to all Afro-descendants who wish it.
The representative of Japan, speaking for that country’s Prime Minister KISHIDA FUMIO, said that the “world stands at a historical inflection point”. The extreme shifts in history have become distinctive features of the past three years and will continue to define the years to come. We should go back to the basic foundations to unite the international community and deepen solidarity,” he stressed. To that end, his country is determined to play a role for stronger governance. It will also work with others to achieve a Security Council that is more representative and reflects the realities of the international community. Underscoring the importance of maintaining and strengthening a free and open international order based on the rule of law, Japan has promoted a Free and Open Indo Pacific vision.
In March, during Japan’s Security Council presidency, it held an open debate on peacebuilding and conflict prevention, while stressing the importance of strengthening the Peacebuilding Commission and increasing its cooperation with the Council, he reported. To contribute to inclusive society, the country plans to launch a programme to nurture the next generation of leaders in the field of gender. Japan will also further work on promoting youth, supporting research and building networks for young researchers, he said. In addition, under its “Hiroshima Action Plan”, Tokyo has been steadily taking initiative to realize a world without nuclear weapons. As the only country that has ever suffered atomic bombings during war, Japan will act to further advance nuclear disarmament in the framework of the forthcoming 2026 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
While Japan will also work towards the denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it will continue to seek to normalize relations with that country, he continued. In addition, focusing on the further development of emerging technologies, Tokyo intends to participate in international rulemaking on lethal autonomous weapon systems. “Digital technologies have the power to transform the future of the world,” he observed, reporting that his country has been working through the Hiroshima AI [artificial intelligence] Process towards achieving safe and trustworthy AI. As well, in 2025, Japan will host the Ninth Tokyo International Conference on African Development in Yokohama. “Together with our African friends and the United Nations, we will find innovative solutions to Africa's and global challenges,” he said.
Right of Reply
The representative of Ecuador, speaking in exercise of the right of reply, responded to the representative of Mexico regarding the incident on 5 April, when under exceptional circumstances Ecuadorian authorities were obligated to enter the Mexican Embassy in Quito to arrest a fugitive from justice. The Government of Mexico allowed a citizen of Ecuador with two sentences against him to stay there as a guest and, despite diplomatic efforts by Ecuador, illegally gave that individual political asylum. On 29 April, he recalled, Ecuador submitted a case on that matter to the International Court of Justice against Mexico.
The representative of China, noting that the South China Sea arbitration was unilaterally initiated by the Philippines, said the Tribunal exceeded its authority and made an unjust ruling. China does not accept or recognizes this ruling. Underscoring that his country has an indisputable ruling over the South China Sea islands and their adjacent waters, he said that the recent escalation is entirely the responsibility of the Philippines.
The representative of Pakistan, responding to the comments made by India the previous day, called it most ironic to see that country, which is committing the worst form of State terrorism in occupied Jammu and Kashmir, portray itself as the victim. He further denounced India’s campaign to damage and destroy Pakistan’s economy by impeding the China-Pakistan economic corridor through the sponsorship of terrorist groups, and pointed to India’s assassination campaign against its dissidents in Canada and the United States.
The representative of Ethiopia, noting that the Abay River makes up 70 per cent of the country’s water resource, said that Egypt — a lower riparian country of the Nile basin that contributes no floats to the resource — works against cooperation and advocates for monopoly based on colonial era arrangements. Ethiopia will continue pursuing its water development on the Abay River, he said, expressing hope that Egypt will re-orient its policy and work on integrated development.
The representative of Armenia, responding to Azerbaijan, noted that despite the call of the Prime Minister to normalize relations, just two days ago Azerbaijan used the General Assembly not only to express reluctance on that issue but to propagate “its usual distortions”. Azerbaijan continues to present unsubstantiated claims that the Constitution of Armenia contains territorial claims against Azerbaijan, which is “entirely false”. Azerbaijan’s territorial claims towards the sovereign territory of Armenia, including its capital, are advanced through fake historical contrasts and weaponizing history, he stated.
The representative of the Philippines, noting that the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea is an anchor of his country’s policy and actions in the West Philippines Sea, said that compliance with this Convention is key to ensuring global and regional peace and sustainable use of oceans.
The representative of Azerbaijan, responding to Armenia, cited previous genocide and other atrocities committed against its civilians, with more than 1 million Azerbaijanis expelled from their homes. Armenia sought to replace Azerbaijani residents of formerly occupied territories with ethnic Armenians, while Azerbaijan fought not against the fictitious entity of civilian residents but against the regular armed forces of Armenia as well as terrorist and mercenary groups. Armenia should investigate its notorious doctrine of ethnic incompatibility, he declared.
The representative of China, taking the floor for the second time, said that his country does not accept or recognize the South China Sea Arbitration. Noting that the UN Convention of the Law of the Seas does not represent the entirety of international maritime law, he said that the arbitration initiated by the Philippines is poised to the issue of territorial claims, which are not subjected to the regulations of the Convention.
The representative of the Philippines reaffirmed that the 2016 South China Sea Arbitration is a testament to the Philippines unwavering commitment to the rule of law and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Over the years, the Philippines has continued to demonstrate its commitment to peace, even in the face of unlawful actions that have caused serious incidents in the South China Sea. It has never diminished its resolve to protect its people and enjoy its full and legally settled maritime entitlements, with its accompanying rights and jurisdictions, he said.
