United Nations A/79/PV.17
General Assembly
Seventy-ninth session
17th plenary meeting
Monday, 30 September 2024, 9 a.m.
New York
Official Records
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent und er the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB -0928
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-17724 (E)
*2417724*
President: Mr. Yang .............................................................................................................(Cameroon)
The meeting was called to order at 9 a.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
General debate
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bassam Sabbagh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your election as President of the General Assembly at its current session, and I
thank your predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for presiding over the previous session.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his efforts to fulfil his mandate under the
provisions of Charter of the United Nations.
As this session of the General Assembly begins, international tensions have
reached a boiling point and efforts to maintain international peace and security are
confronted by real challenges and threats. Clashes are growing fierce, crises are
multiplying, conflicts are escalating, chaos is spreading, terrorism is gaining ground,
the global economy is faltering, poverty rates are rising, climate change is
accelerating, and development indicators are lagging. Those are the unfortunate
results of the eight decades of multilateral action that have followed the establishment
of the United Nations.
While we previously sought to promote preventive diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, today we are witnessing more direct wars and proxy wars
waged through investment in terrorist tools. Instead of reaping the fruits of scientific
progress to serve human civilization and the well-being of all people, we are
witnessing the disgraceful use of modern technologies as deadly tools to sow death
and destruction. Instead of investing efforts and resources in achieving sustainable
development for all, we see some persisting in policies that plunder nations of their
resources, rob peoples of their wealth and impose unilateral coercive measures that
impoverish populations and devastate their lives.
For more than a decade now, Syria has experienced unparalleled suffering. It
fell victim to a fierce terrorist war, direct aggression on its territories that continue to

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-177242/68
this day, a suffocating multidimensional economic blockade in various forms and
unprecedented political and media incitement. Billions of dollars have been spent to
demolish development achievements, spread chaos and undermine security and
stability and to force millions of Syrians to leave their homes, only to become
internally displaced or refugees in other countries. Nevertheless, Members may rest
assured that all of this has failed to make Syria abandon our strong beliefs, our firm
positions and the resolute national choices we have made. Syria has never hesitated
to protect and defend its people and never faltered in its decision to defeat terrorism.
Economic hardships have not prevented us from meeting the needs of our people. All
that has happened has unequivocally exposed the true intentions of the collective
West’s policies against Syria, which completely contradict the principles and
purposes that formed the founding pillars and functions of the international
Organization.
Israel’s ongoing occupation of Arab territories since 1967, including the Syrian
Arab Golan, and the genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity it commits
are a glaring example of the failure of the Organization, and the Security Council in
particular, to end that expansionist and racist occupation and ongoing aggression. It
is damning proof that the United States has prevented the Council from fulfilling its
responsibility to confront threats to international peace and security.
Since 7 October 2023, the Israeli occupation has continued to commit bloody
and terrorist crimes, adding another chapter to its seven-decades criminal record. In
recent months, the occupying forces and settler gangs have been carrying out a savage
aggression against the Palestinian people and, before the eyes of the entire world,
committing genocide that has claimed the lives of more than 42,000 Palestinians,
most of them children and women.
The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and reiterates its solidarity with their legitimate struggle to liberate
their occupied land and establish their independent State on their entire national
territory, with Jerusalem as its capital, while ensuring the right of Palestinian refugees
to return to their homeland, in line with international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions. Syria also condemns all attempts to liquidate the United Nations Re lief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and suspend
the services it provides to Palestinians in their land and in neighbouring countries.
We stress the need to hold Israel accountable for the war crimes it is committing,
including its deliberate targeting of more than 200 personnel working for UNRWA
and other United Nations and humanitarian agencies.
In an attempt to conceal the failure of their war against the Palestinians and to
fend off their own internal crisis, the Israeli occupying forces have chosen to drag the
region into a serious escalation, while benefiting from the immunity, impunity and
unlimited support provided by certain Western countries, in particular the United
States, in a clear case of hypocrisy and double standards. Israeli forces have scaled
up their attacks on countries of the region, including my country, Syria, targeting vital
civilian facilities, residential buildings and even diplomatic premises, resulting in the
death of dozens of civilians and significant material damage and hindering the
delivery humanitarian aid to Syrians.
On 27 July, Israeli occupying forces committed another heinous crime against
our people in the occupied Syrian Golan when they targeted the Syrian town of Majdal
Shams, claiming the lives of 12 Syrian children. The criminal Israeli forces went even
further, blaming others for that tragedy and exploiting the death of innocent Syrians
for propaganda purposes. The open Israeli aggression has also been extended to our
brotherly Lebanon. Two weeks ago, the Israeli occupation authorities committed an
unprecedented crime against the Lebanese by using communications technology as a

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
3/6824-17724
tool to collectively kill unarmed civilians. A few days ago, the Israeli occupation
authorities targeted the southern suburb of Beirut with a treacherous and cowardly
aggression, destroying an entire residential block and using tons of explosive bombs
to assassinate Hizbullah Secretary-General Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, who for more
than three decades led the honourable Lebanese national resistance against the Israeli
occupation.
That large-scale Israeli aggression, which is unfettered by any restriction or
limitation, is pushing the region to the brink of a dangerous escalation and
confrontation whose consequences cannot be predicted, with disastrous effect on
peace and security not only in our region, but also beyond. The Syrian Arab Republic
calls on all States Members of the United Nations to work to end the Israeli aggression
against Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, hold the occupation authorities accountable for
their crimes and prevent impunity.
The Syrian Arab Republic unequivocally reiterates that the Golan is occupied
Syrian territory and that its inhabitants are Syrian Arab citizens who are and will
always be an integral part of the people of Syria. They have struggled for decades
against the occupation. Syria reaffirms that recovering the occupied Syrian Golan, in
line with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), is an
inalienable right that shall never be subject to compromise, affected by the passage
of time or be subject to the statute of limitations.
The crimes and continued attacks of the Israeli occupying forces against Syria
cannot be uncoupled from the subversive role played by certain Western countries,
especially the United States, in my country, Syria. Those countries have continued to
violate Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity by illegally deploying their
military forces inside Syria’s territory, allowing their officials to infiltrate Syria and
supporting separatist militias and terrorist groups. Those countries have also worke d
to exacerbate the humanitarian situation of the Syrian people by depriving them of
the benefit of their resources as a result of their systematic looting of Syria’s national
riches and by imposing unilateral coercive measures whose disastrous effects hav e
touched all aspects of the daily lives of Syrians. Those measures have targeted various
vital sectors, most notably public health, energy, banking and financial transfers. They
have also targeted the transportation and agricultural sectors, leading to a decline in
food security rates.
All the unfounded allegations made by Western countries to justify such illegal
measures and to deny or downplay their catastrophic impacts have been laid bare in
multiple recent United Nations reports. In that context, Syria demands once again the
immediate, full and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures, which
amount to the collective punishment of people, a form of economic terrorism and a
flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and international law.
Since the beginning of the terrorist war on Syria, the Syrian Government has
responsibly and constructively engaged with all initiatives aimed at supporting efforts
to preserve Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, protect its people from
terrorists and improve the living conditions of Syrians. Many measures have been
taken to that end, which can be summed up as follows.
First, we have mobilized all efforts to eradicate terrorist groups designated by
the Security Council and to put a halt to their dark philosophy, extremist ideology and
practices based on killing, torture, enforced disappearance, restriction of freedoms,
the recruitment of children, discrimination and violence against women and girls. The
Syrian Government continues to confront the remaining organizations with a view to
ending the suffering of Syrians and calls on all countries to repatriate those of their

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-177244/68
citizens who are currently detained in illegal centres in north-eastern Syria and to
close those facilities in the light of the potential danger they pose.
Second, we are pursuing national reconciliation and local settlement
agreements. Twenty-three amnesty decrees have been issued, facilitating the proper
social reintegration of those who had lost their way. The most recent of these was
legislative decree No. 27 of 22 September.
Third, we are supporting and facilitating humanitarian access, inter alia, by
granting the United Nations multiple authorizations to use three border crossings to
deliver humanitarian assistance to eligible Syrian civilians in north-western Syria and
by granting the necessary approvals for humanitarian deliveries from inside Syria,
despite all attempts by terrorist groups to obstruct humanitarian access and steal or
divert the aid.
Four, Syrian State institutions continue to work to enhance their role and
increase their efficiency by delivering all constitutionally mandated entitlements in a
timely manner, following up on the process of economic and administrative
development and reform, and moving forward with efforts to modernize legislative
structures, including those related to strengthening the rule of law, developing media
work and social protection programmes, empowering women, protecting the rights of
children and persons with disabilities, implementing the strategic plan for gender
equality and developing legislation regulating conscription.
Fifth, we are sparing no effort to support the dignified return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes. An agreement has been reached with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on several measures that are
currently being implemented diligently. Discussions are also ongoing with certain
neighbouring countries to launch innovative projects, which could be a model to
facilitate and accelerate return.
Sixth, we are openly engaging with all efforts and initiatives made at the
political level, including by taking part in the Astana meetings, which have achieved
concrete results. The Syrian Government is also in constant contact with the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and is cooperating with him, in line with
his mandated role as a facilitator of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process.
Seventh, we are committed to dialogue and diplomacy as a basis for correcting
relations with other countries. The Syrian Government has engaged positively with
the various initiatives put forward in that regard out of its firm belief that building
sound relations based on specific principles and clear grounds ensures the
achievement of the desired results, in particular mutual respect for States’ sovereignty
and territorial unity, joint action to address all threats to security and stability, and the
pursuit of common interests without interfering in internal affairs.
As Syria heals the wounds of what it has been exposed to, it looks to the future
with a sense of hope and optimism. However, the success of its efforts necessarily
requires the collective West to stop politicizing humanitarian work and linking it to
political conditionality. Donors need to fulfil their pledges of humanitarian funding
and provide sustainable solutions for livelihoods and support for resilience, including
by working to strengthen and increase early recovery projects in quantity and quality,
and for the immediate, complete and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive
measures.
Syria reiterates its demand for a Middle East zone free of all weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and for Israel to be compelled to join
relevant international treaties and conventions and place its installations under
international monitoring.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
5/6824-17724
Syria expresses its support for and solidarity with Arab countries, especially
those facing challenging circumstances resulting from foreign interference in their
affairs, natural events or climate change.
Syria reiterates its support for the right of the Russian Federation to defend itself
and to preserve its national security in response to the West’s hostile policies and in
rejection of the logic of hegemony and unipolarity. Syria also condemns attempts t o
confiscate Russian financial assets.
Syria expresses once again its full support for the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
legitimate right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We commend Iran’s
constructive and responsible approach in that regard.
Syria renews its support for the one China principle and the stances of the
People’s Republic of China as it faces external attempts to interfere in its internal
affairs. We stress China’s inalienable right to take the measures and steps it deems
necessary to defend its sovereignty.
Syria condemns the United States’ decades-long economic embargo on Cuba
and rejects the issuance of the infamous list of so-called State sponsors of terrorism.
Syria calls for an end to the United States military drills and exercises on the Korean
peninsula, as they contribute to raising tensions in that region. My country reiterates
its solidarity with Venezuela in the face of the flagrant interference in its internal
affairs and the hostile policies against it.
Syria calls for the immediate lifting of all unilateral coercive measures imposed
by Western countries on Russia, Iran, Venezuela, Belarus, Cuba, Nicaragua, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea and others, as well as on my country,
Syria.
In conclusion, I call on the countries of the world to muster the courage and
make the right choice to guarantee a better present and future for current and future
generations; to save humankind from the scourge of all-out wars looming on the
horizon by reforming international political and financial institutions; and to end the
state of hegemony and unipolarity and deter attempts to undermine the United Nations
Charter and replace it with the so-called rules-based order.
The Syrian Arab Republic looks forward to seeing the current session of the
General Assembly, under your leadership, Sir, fulfil the promise of its theme and
stresses that success in translating that theme into practical reality will require the
abandoning of policies of hegemony, exclusion, blockade and collective punishment
of peoples, adherence to the Charter of our Organization, respect for international law
and multilateral diplomacy, and the granting to developing countries of equal
opportunities to advance their societies and achieve well-being, prosperity and
sustainable development for their peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Valdrack Ludwing
Jaentschke Whitaker, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua.
Mr. Jaentschke Whitaker (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): After hearing so
many analyses, the description of so many misfortunes and calamities, and the details
of the holocausts that afflict us as a human family, and after seeing and observing the
brilliance of so much intelligence, we are left with silence and emptiness because, in
the midst of all that we know or that we believe we know we do not find or perceive
common answers to the weaknesses and pains of our societies, the abuses and
aberrations, the aggressions of Powers and the unjust world order that, in all aspects,
rather seems to be suffocating us more and more, despite our knowledge, experience
and the spirit that as human beings we must nourish to better enlighten ourselves.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-177246/68
The catastrophes of injustice, the pretensions to supremacy and the perverse
appetites of domination, submission and barbarism, as in the most terrible times of
what was called colonization or conquest, seem to be getting worse, perpetuating the
slavery of humankind to the most ignoble feelings, to greed and avarice and to the
dominion of some people over others, flouting the principles and values of equality
and rights that humankind and intelligence believed to have established at the cost of
great suffering.
Cataclysm after cataclysm, we are extending war as a savage method of
imperialism and capitalism — itself savage, barbaric and fierce — walking towards
the extinction of all living beings and refusing to accept that only peace can win out.
Because peace is justice; it is harmonious coexistence, respectful cooperation and the
march of freedom, dignity and the sovereignty of peoples, which assures us all of
better times in history.
But peace would seem today to be one of the most ardent fantasies and dreams.
We do not walk the paths of peace and of course we have no understanding of the just
and lasting peace that can be seen as the path towards a world of brotherhood, joy and
solidarity. Every morning we wake up, in so many parts of our planet, to the dead and
more dead, sacrificed on the bonfires of the insipid superiority of some; dead and
more dead that weigh or should weigh on the conscience of the warmongers,
merchants and traffickers of apocalyptic wars imposed by those who, with blood and
fire, destroy beings, cultures and lands, enslave, crucify and exploit life to their liking,
whim and convenience.
In that daily massacre, how many us find ourselves to be the losers, particularly
in the sphere of the most human and profound feelings and emotions — love,
brotherhood and the hope that human beings seem to be abandoning. Those values
are undoubtedly victims of the hell that is sold to us as paradise and of their satanic
majesties who, unaware of the tragedies they impose, forget the elementary and basic
principle of civilization, which should be the empowerment of all for the good of all.
We lose our soul every day, not because we sell it to the devil or devils, but
because our generations should have learned so much from the millions of human
beings who have been sacrificed throughout history on the bonfires of vanities,
ambitions, fatal selfishness and failures not internalized. The enemies of peace claim
and seem to be succeeding in turning us into the most arid of deserts in terms of that
spirituality that we do not see or understand and of the strengths of human
consciousness that we do not apply.
Among all the aggressions, barbarities, attacks and crimes; among all the
satanic, infernal attacks; among all the evidence of evil defeating good, we, the people
who know how to fight, have our culture and spiritual experience of national dignity
and decorum. That is our greatness. That is our most precious heritage. That is the
kingdom of God on Earth. That is the beginning, the dawn of a new world that is
being born amidst anguish, suffering and pain, forced and imposed upon us by those
sick minds that do not see and do not want to see that other world and try to continue
inhabiting — for their own benefit and with millennial backwardness — the old and
blood-soaked world.
So much pain, so many battles, so many chains and so much slavery go into
forging the steel of our human condition, which rises from truth to truth, from
awakening to awakening, from courage to courage and from boldness to boldness,
each day accumulating, paradoxically, more glory and more victories of the genuine
truth and the human spirit that we must all make prevail. No one can take from us the
certainty of a new world. No one can take from us the reality of a fraternal world of

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
7/6824-17724
understanding, solidarity and respectful cooperation in the present and for the future
of all.
In the old world designed by the conquistadors, they will be frustrated, sad and
alone, condemned and repudiated by those of us who have learned to revere love, to
banish the grotesque impositions of hatred, to bury the humiliations, degradations and
indignities and, above all, to ignore the terror and fear with which the damned of the
Earth incite and seek to intimidate us.
We shall never fall to our knees. We shall never condescend to the enemies of
peace and the common good. We shall never be slaves to selfishness or greed. We
shall never turn a blind eye to the atrocity that some turn into a rule of life or to the
false narrative of the hypocrites who with artificial techniques and tactics and
technicolor celluloid want to sell us and install in us a childish, fictional, blind, deaf,
dumb and paralytic world, exonerating those guilty of so many crimes against
humanity.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the
genocide that the Government of Israel and its allies in the first world have
committed, are committing and continue to commit against the glorious Palestinian
people, against the brave people of Lebanon and against so many other brave,
courageous and dignified peoples who do not submit to brutality.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the
aggressions against Syria, Iran and many other great and fighting brothers on all
continents.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the
occupation and usurpation of the rights of peoples and countries, such as Haiti.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the
systematic policy of extermination of cultures and rights that the colonial and
imperialist Powers maintain against peoples, Governments and countries, including
Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua, which have joined the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) in a strategic unity of defence of our
sovereignties, independence and legitimate paths and our own models of
institutionality, empowerment and the participatory and direct democracy we
exercise.
We are in solidarity with all the countries and peoples affected by the bestiality
and brutality that has been unleashed against our Mother Earth and our resources,
generating what is known today as climate change, which is nothing but selfishness
and the plundering of our planetary resources; which have degenerated into a
profusion of disasters of all kinds; which are not natural; which demand climate
justice; and which have been and are imposed by the greedy enslavers, obstructionists
and plunderers of this world, without consideration or compensation, reparation or
compensation, against those who have the most to lose. We unite in brotherhood,
solidarity and complementarity in the just struggles for food security, health security,
security in education, security of rights, human security — rights that we will never
renounce.
We join, of course, in the urgent and daily struggle against terrorism in all its
forms, against drug trafficking and organized crime, against the vices and criminal
activities that have been imposed on us to weaken our institutions, models and
practices, and to strengthen interference through policies and modalities that invade
us and encourage the installation of forms and ways of life that are foreign to us,
further generating an image of pitiful incapacity or beggary, which we do not accept
in any way.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-177248/68
To the invaders and interventionists in sheep’s clothing — sheep’s skin and
wolves’ mouths — we say: We are peoples rich in culture, resources, community
models and values that have been and are disfigured, defamed and plundered. We will
not allow them to turn us into needy supplicants, because we are not. Despite their
facade of false kindness and generosity, their interests are evident and their
interference in our own affairs is not only unacceptable, but denounceable and
inappropriate.
We have the right to all our freedoms and to the supreme dignity of the spirit
and culture, of consciousness and conviction, of learning and the consistent,
permanent and humble pilgrimage that inspires us to learn from everyone, to
incorporate all that is good and to discard and repudiate everything that seeks to turn
us into servile conglomerates, divided by the strategies of the imperialists of the
Earth. We defend our supreme dreams alongside Bolívar, Martí, Sandino, Morazán
and so many great beings who preceded us and anticipated the duty to fight, fight,
fight and to win, win, win.
Nothing is free in this world. We must grow in consciousness and heart every
day, absolutely lucid, absolutely clear and absolutely convinced and consistent,
because only the union of the peoples of the planet will make the imperialists of the
Earth give up. Only that union will make them retreat, even if they continue plotting
their crimes. We will find them, wrangle them, expose them, confront them and defeat
them.
In the fighting and victorious ALBA, we are one with Chávez, Nicolás and their
great people at all times. We are one with the Cuba of Fidel, Raúl and Miguel and
their dignified and formidable resistance. We are one with Bolivia and its respectable
paths. We are one with Honduras and its challenges. We are one with all of
Mesoamerica and the challenges we face. We are one with Asia, with the Arab peoples
and with the peoples of Africa who also live among us.
We are one with the Russian Federation in its great battles against bestial
fascism — battles that we shall surely all win.
We are one with the People’s Republic of China, which teaches us so much and
shares with us its magnificent and great experience of building the well -being of its
people and of solidarity with the entire world for a community of the future.
We are one with all the fighters and warriors of the world and with the powers
of firmness and dignity that we have always possessed. Today, more awake than ever,
we do not allow ourselves to be crucified. On the contrary, we raise with pride and
joy our flags and banners because we know that humanity and the human spirit must
win. We will win and we will prevail. Only in that way can we preserve and increase
the highest ideals and values of that humankind to which we all belong.
From our Nicaragua, blessed, dignified, always sovereign, Christian, socialist
and solidary, we embrace all throughout the world who seek peace, love, respect,
rights and well-being. United forever with them all, we move forward to the eternal
beyond of our victorious General Augusto Sandino and the immortal poetry of our
great Rubén Darío and his “Song of Hope”:
“A great flight of crows stains the celestial blue.
A thousand-year-old breath brings threats of plague.
Men are murdered in the East End.
“Has the apocalyptic Antichrist been born?
Omens have been known and wonders have been seen
and the return of Christ seems imminent.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
9/6824-17724
“The earth is pregnant with pain so deep
that the imperial dreamer, brooding,
suffer with the anguish of the heart of the world.
“Executioners of ideals afflicted the earth:
in a well of shadow humanity locks itself
with the rude Molossians of hatred and war.
“O Lord Jesus Christ! Why are you late, what are you waiting for
to extend your hand of light over the beasts
and make your divine flags shine in the sun?
“Suddenly arises and pours the essence of life
about so many crazy, sad or hardened souls
that, lover of darkness, your sweet dawn forgets.
“Come, Lord, to make glory of yourself.
Come with tremor of stars and horror of cataclysm,
come to bring love and peace over the abyss.
“And your white horse, which the visionary looked at,
happens. And sound the divine extraordinary bugle.
My heart will be the ember of your censer.”
Today we remember the Nicaraguan father, priest, chancellor of the dignity and
decorum of our peoples, Miguel d´Escoto Brockmann, who fought for and bequeathed
to us the responsibility of battling for the refoundation of the United Nations so that
it might promote debate and the combat for justice, the right to harmony and the
happiness of peoples — the United Nations as an instrument of the nations to
denounce, condemn, reject and repudiate all the abominations and aberrations that are
committed against all of us; to encourage the good and affection; and to banish evil,
disgrace and hatred in our relations, which must be marked by brotherly coexistence.
May the peoples of the world arise. The Earth must be the paradise of all
humankind. The world will be different and better. That is what we are working for.
That is what unites us. That is what we believe in. I convey the affectionate greetings
of the people of Nicaragua, of the President, Commander Daniel Ortega, and Vice -
President Rosario Murillo.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Osman Saleh
Mohammed, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Eritrea.
Mr. Mohammed (Eritrea): Allow me to join previous speakers in congratulating
you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy -
ninth session.
The current session is taking place at a crucial juncture of transition in the
architecture of global governance. Before I delve into the main subject, allow me to
digress a bit and dwell on some historical perspectives.
As will be recalled, the maintenance of global peace was indeed the overarching
mantra and proclaimed objective when the League of Nations was established one
century ago in January 1920, in the immediate aftermath of the First World War.
However, in spite of the lofty pronounced objectives, the League of Nations could not
fully measure up to its noble task or deter the eruption of the Second World War.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772410/68
Twenty-five years later, in October 1945, the United Nations was solemnly
established to prevent another world war and guarantee durable global peace, but yet
again our global community was plunged into the era of the Cold War, whose hallmark
was a confrontational, bipolar international world order. With all its dynamics and
deleterious consequences for global peace and stability, the Cold War era culminated,
after 45 years, in the collapse of the former Soviet bloc in 1991. As it happened, that
later phase ushered in a new, precarious epoch of a unipolar world order, which was
in essence bereft of any new ideology. As a matter of fact, the new dispensation
represented a retrograde relapse into and revival of centuries-old colonialism and
slavery. Indeed, the resources and wealth of others were usurped to mollify the
insatiable greed of the few through force and other tools of repression.
The manifestations of that policy are myriad and include pronounced policies
of containment by the architects and proponents of a unipolar world order in the
European theatre and especially reckless acts in Ukraine; provocative containment
policies against China, pursued in Asia for analogous objectives and considerations;
and trends that those policies portend for global peace. In our neighbourhood, the
ramifications of that policy include the perilous war unleashed to stifle the
Palestinians’ cause and evict them from their land; the chaos that it continues to
engender and the wider regional conflagration that it may trigger; acts of subversion
conducted and multiple crises fomented in several parts in Africa, under various
pretexts, to preserve and maintain colonial slavery; overt interventions carried out in
the same manner in Latin America to install surrogate regimes; various subterfuges
conducted to stifle and roll back burgeoning public protests in Europe and the United
States against the backdrop of fragmentation of traditional coalitions. All those
distressing developments and trends amplify the innate flaws and dysfunctionality of
the reckless policies of the unipolar world order.
Efforts exerted during the various epochs to imbue an institutional structure and
mandate into the global architecture were not ultimate aims and objectives in
themselves. It is clear that institutional formats are mere mechanisms and modalities
for achieving desired goals and objectives. Peace and stability are indispensable
prerequisites for the promotion of prosperity and growth and the attainment of the
ultimate human aspirations of justice and the prevalence of a just political order — in
other words, the assertion and guaranteeing of a just global order where domination,
deceit, coercion and intimidation, plunder and monopolization are not countenanced
or tolerated. The unequivocal aspirations of the peoples of the world over the past
100 years have been, precisely, the crystallization — through the League of Nations
and later the United Nations — of a just global order.
The perplexing question remains whether those lofty aspirations and profound
wishes were achieved. The poignant answer is: No, they have not been realized. On
the other hand, the logical corollary to failure is not despondency but redoubled and
more vigorous commitment and resilience in order to achieve the cherished objectives
and goals.
Allow me now to revert to the predicament of the Eritrean people, which
epitomizes in all respects the typical ordeal of numerous other peoples.
Three generations of Eritreans were doomed to make precious and inordinately
huge sacrifices for almost 80 years following the end of the Second World War,
merely because the Dulles brothers determined that Eritrea did not serve the United
States strategic interests. As it happened, the people of Eritrea were compelled to
wage a political and armed struggle of liberation for 50 long years, and even when
they achieved their hard-won independence in 1991 they were denied respite and the
opportunity to funnel their energies into nation-building. Indeed, the same hegemonic
policy considerations and defunct ploys were ramped up to foment unremitting crises

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
11/6824-17724
and instability by instigating border conflicts and other ruses. The suffering and
economic damage that ensued and the opportunity loss that was incurred have been
enormous by any standard.
Still, and in the face of unwarranted onslaught, the resilience of the Eritrean
people was not dampened. And yet, the spiral of mindless hostility continued to
intensify without let-up. In 2009, Eritrea was subjected to sanctions on the basis of
unsubstantiated and trumped-up charges. As it happened, the forces of hegemony
plotted to further punish the people of Eritrea and invoked a preposterous pretext for
a people and country that have waged a relentless struggle against terrorism and
domination for decades. The sanctions were ultimately lifted in 2018, but the question
remains: Why were they imposed in the first place? Furthermore, it must be borne in
mind that illicit unilateral sanctions, futile demonization campaigns and subversive
acts to instigate conflicts in the region continue unabated.
The ordeal meted out to the people of Eritrea is only the tip of the iceberg. The
tribulations imposed on other peoples in Africa, Latin America, Asia, Europe and the
Americas are severe indeed. In the event, we urge the categorical lifting of the
unilateral coercive measures and sanctions imposed on countries like Eritrea,
Zimbabwe, Venezuela and Cuba, including the 60-year embargo against Cuba and its
unjust placement on the dubious list of State sponsors of terrorism.
Meanwhile, we need to pause and ask: What is the relevance and impact of the
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations against the
backdrop of the law of the jungle that the hegemonic Powers are bent on imposing?
That precarious reality amplifies the imperative and urgent need for the peoples of
the world to strive with higher vigour, fortitude and enhanced solidarity than what
has been seen for 100 years to install a global order that guarantees peace and stability.
That is not an option that can be left to circumstance. The forces of hegemony must
also be held accountable for their crimes for the dispensation of justice.
Let me conclude my brief address by reiterating our best wishes for success in
our current endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bakary Yaou
Sangaré, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Nigeriens Abroad of the
Republic of the Niger.
Mr. Sangaré (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by extending my
warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on your election as President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my warmest thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, for his outstanding work
during his term, despite a global context in turmoil. Sadly, I can go no further with
my congratulations, as representatives will soon understand.
A year ago, in this very Hall and at this very rostrum, my country, the Niger,
was unjustly and unjustifiably deprived of the floor. That is not the worst of it. We
were told of the rationale for that decision at the time but, worse yet, representatives
of other countries in the same situation as mine were allowed to speak and were even
received with honours by the Secretary-General. I am sure that everyone will readily
agree with me that a double standard is in play that is likely to undermine the
credibility of our common Organization. My country accepted that decision with
dignity, but it felt the snub. That is why my statement will be focused in particular on
those who have been left behind and on human dignity.
Human dignity dovetails perfectly with the ideals of the reconstruction under
way in the Niger. Some have been left behind, however, as a result of multifaceted

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772412/68
conflicts and violence, inequalities, the lack of solidarity and the marginalization of
a large part of the population of our planet who aspire to a better world. In that regard,
I would like to welcome the participation in this session of Palestine, which has been
left behind. We hope that its well-deserved presence among us will constitute a
decisive step towards the advent of a free, independent and sovereign Palestinian
State, living in peace with its neighbours within its 1967 borders. The Niger reaffi rms
its support for the Palestinian cause and believes that only a two -State solution can
put an end to the cycle of violence and guarantee peace and security in the region. My
country also deplores the situation in Lebanon and calls for an immediate end t o
hostilities.
Every year, we engage in the ritual of lamenting the situation of poor countries
and pleading for a more equitable world, but we have to admit that we meet too much
and do too little in a world in which we are supernumerary. At a time when poor
countries are treading water, as the young people put it, not to say sinking into the
morass, the rich are lining their pockets with our resources and continuing to support
corrupt and subservient regimes that rig elections and plunge their people into total
poverty. Meanwhile, the international community is wallowing in a complicit silence
that once again reflects a policy of double standards.
From this rostrum, I launch a vibrant appeal to the exploited and abandoned
peoples and tell them that it is not up to the wealthy countries to find solutions for us.
I affirm that those solutions are ours to define. They consist of giving up mendicant
and degrading aid for a dignified partnership in which our natural resources will be
sold at their true worth and the profits invested for the benefit of our populations. It
is in that spirit that my country manages with its own funds the damage and the
humanitarian crisis born of the unprecedented floods that it is suffering this year. We
do not need a lesson in democracy. What matters to us are the interests, choices and
aspirations of our valiant peoples. As the President of the Conseil national pour la
sauvegarde de la patrie (CNSP) and Head of State, Brigadier General Abdourahamane
Tiani, has said, “No State, no inter-State organization will dictate to my country the
conduct to be adopted, much less its agenda in terms of strategic or diplomatic
partnership”.
As everyone knows, for over a decade the Sahel region has been in the grip of
a serious security crisis that threatens the very existence of its States and constitutes
a notorious attack on international peace and security. In order to face together the
common challenges that assail them, particularly security, the three States under the
leadership of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso; Colonel Assimi Goïta,
President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali; and Brigadier General
Abdourahamane Tiani, President of the Conseil national pour la sauvegarde de la
patrie and Head of State of the Niger, signed on 16 September 2023 the Liptako -
Gourma Charter establishing the Alliance of Sahel States (AES).
Today, we note both the strong support of the populations and the military
successes achieved on the ground by our defence and security forces in the fight
against terrorism and transnational crime. I take this opportunity to welcome the
creation of the Unified Force of the AES and the smooth coordination between the
units established. I pay a vibrant tribute to all the civilian and military victims of
violence in the Sahel.
On the occasion of the historic Summit of Heads of State of the AES, held in
Niamey on 6 July, the Alliance was transformed into a confederation based on three
pillars: defence/security, diplomacy and development. That new strategic framework
for integration, intended to eventually become a federation, has great potential in
natural resources to achieve its objectives. That potential is coveted by certain

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
13/6824-17724
Western Powers that finance and arm terrorist groups in order to destabilize our
countries.
The Niger reiterates its firm condemnation of those hostile acts and rejects any
form of support for terrorism, in particular the active and publicly acknowledged
support of Ukraine for the terrorist coalition that launched a cowardly attack on the
town of Tinzawaten in Mali. This is also the right moment to denounce the subversive
actions and the new recolonization strategy claimed and implemented by France,
which informs, trains, finances and arms terrorist groups in the Sahel. It offers lodging
and meals to its local lackeys, some of whom occupy the Niger’s diplomatic premises
in Paris, in flagrant violation of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
Far from interrupting the current dynamic in the Sahel region, those attempts at
destabilization only strengthen the determination of our countries to move forward in
pursuit of the objectives set. Despite all those adversities, the AES caravan is moving
forward.
Regardless of what others may feel, the AES now constitutes a new geopolitical
dispensation that intends to fully play its role on the international stage, while
respecting the sovereignty and free choice of its partners. As Colonel Assimi Goïta,
President of the AES Confederation, said on the occasion of the first anniversary of
the Alliance:
“In our dynamic of independence and regained sovereignty, we
remain open to cooperation with brotherly and friendly peoples in a spirit
of fraternity and mutual respect.”
At the national level, the inclusive vision of the President of the CNSP and Head
of State, Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani, is structured around the following
four strategic axes: strengthening security and social cohesion, promoting good
governance, developing production bases and accelerating social reforms. Those axes
seek to ensure the security, political and socioeconomic sovereignty of our country.
In that regard, they constitute the frame of reference for all interventions by the State
and its partners to create conditions for the structural transformation of the Nigerien
economy and improve the well-being of the population. To support that
transformation, particularly in the mining and oil sector, my country is willing to enter
into partnerships with foreign investors based on the win-win principle and respect
for the dignity of our populations, who have been left behind until now. The objective
is to make the Sahel a zone of peace and prosperity, as President Tiani has affirmed.
I cannot conclude without thanking the brother and friendly countries Burkina
Faso, Mali, Togo, Morocco, Türkiye, Russia, China, Iran and all those who support
the Niger in its rebuilding process. I would ask our nationals in the diaspora, wherever
they may be, to continue to pray that God will protect the AES, our peoples and our
Governments. Long live solidarity among peoples! Long live the AES Confederation!
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Karamoko Jean
Marie Traoré, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Cooperation and Burkinabes
Abroad of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Traoré (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I have the great privilege and the
immense honour to convey to you, Sir, on behalf of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President
of Faso and Head of State, the fraternal and friendly greetings of the valiant people
of Burkina Faso, who, despite all adversities, including the ignominy of the
aggressors and enemies of peace and manipulations and interferences of all kinds,
have been able to develop resilience to pursue their radiant march towards inclusive
economic and social development.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772414/68
I am also pleased, Mr. President, to convey to you, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Burkina Faso, my warm congratulations on your brilliant election
to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy -ninth session.
To your predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, I extend the congratulations of my
delegation for the achievements made during his mandate in an international context
particularly marked by profound divergences.
Burkina Faso fully appreciates the actions that the United Nations system and
its partners, under the Secretary-General’s coordination, continue to carry out on the
ground in support of the Government’s efforts. In that regard, my country welcomes
the choice of the highly evocative and challenging theme of this session: “Leaving no
one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development
and human dignity for present and future generations”. In evoking the theme, allow
me to convey the aspirations of the Sahelian social classes in general and Burkina
Faso in particular.
I am a farmer who protects and perpetuates traditions and customs. I ardently
cultivate my land, which was bequeathed to me by my ancestors to feed my family
and ensure its well-being. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a woman, a mother and a worthy descendant of the Princesses Yennenga
and Guimbi Ouattara, endowed like other brave Sahelian women with a strength of
character like no other. I would give my life to ensure the survival and development
of my children, my brothers and sisters, my compatriots in a society of peace and
love. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a young Burkinabé, a farmer, breeder, trader, civil servant, artist, craftsman
and student — young people from all regions and all backgrounds, raised as a brave
and combative youth and committed to doing my part for the development of Burkina
Faso. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a child, girl or boy, from cities and villages and from internally displaced
persons sites. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a Burkinabé, Malian and Nigerian soldier, a Volunteer for the Defence of
the Homeland, a husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother and sister. I
have taken an oath to defend my homeland with my life, to selflessly fight the enemy
on the battlefield and to protect my fellow citizens against all danger. I want to be
able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a Burkinabé living abroad, a courageous, hard-working and honest man, a
native of the country of upright men. In my life far from the motherland, I participate
with enthusiasm in the common struggle for peace and stability in my country and
my subregion. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
Those aspirations are the beacons that guide the action of the Government,
whose struggle is to create a framework for the men and women of the Sahel to live
free, dignified and proud.
The theme of our session, highly appreciated for its relevance, actually exhumes
a fundamental concern as old as the United Nations and which is addressed by almost
all the debates that have taken place here. It tell us that it is no longer really a questi on
of thinking about what to do; it is a question of giving substance and life to our
speeches through concrete action. We must go beyond words to finally act in favour
of a fairer world, free of prejudices and stereotypes that tend to relegate certain
peoples or certain parts of the planet to the background, condemned to wait in the
dungeons of isolation and contempt for potential help, at the mercy and whim of

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
15/6824-17724
Powers that claim to be the only ones able to set the course and pace to be followed
by others.
We must refocus our efforts more on the fundamental objectives of our
Organization, primarily designed to promote the well-being of populations and
nations by ensuring them peace and security. That absolute urgency and necessity to
co-construct and act in favour of a fairer world are all the more relevant in the current
context, in which our world is dominated by persistent crises, complex conflicts and
unequal economic governance that accentuate the rupture among States and the
divisions among peoples, with human tragedies as corollaries.
That disastrous configuration is the result of a multilateralism at a crossroads —
a multilateralism that has run out of steam and whose reputation has been frequently
tarnished by the partisan and predatory actions of certain Member States that have set
themselves up as masters of the world and made the submission and exploitation of
other States the guiding principle of their foreign policy. We must rightly be
concerned about that because the harmony and cohesion of our world are at stake.
That is why Burkina Faso takes this opportunity to appeal once again to the reason
and wisdom of all, particularly the Powers of our planet, to promote inclusive global
governance free of hegemonic visions. It is at that price that we will restore the
nobility of the United Nations.
Restoring the integrity of the territory by ensuring the security of populations
and their property; rebuilding political, administrative, economic and financial
governance to carry and embody the aspirations to a better life for all Burkinabés;
and undertaking reforms and development actions that will lead to shared prosperity
and sustainable economic and social progress are all projects launched under the
leadership and foresight of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso and Head of
State.
The Burkinabé people, who have decided to assert and assume their sovereignty
by putting an end to their enslavement and who have demonstrated extraordinary
resilience, like all the populations of the Sahel, understand the stakes and the scope
of this fight and have mobilized alongside our defence and security forces. With that
unwavering support, and thanks to the patriotism, ingenuity, bravery and spirit of
sacrifice of its sons and daughters, Burkina Faso is recording previously unhoped -for
successes as well as highly appreciable results in the fierce fight against terrorists,
who have been weaponized, remote-controlled and financed by neocolonialist
Powers. I take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute to all those, civilians and
military, who have fallen on the battlefield and whose memory I salute.
Through strategic and visionary reforms, marked among other things by an
increase in the operational capacities of the troops and the reorganization of our
fighting forces on the ground, we have multiplied our means of action and achieved
the salutary reconquest of areas infested by the criminals and their allies. Specifically,
nearly 70 per cent of the territory is now under the control of the State, as opposed to
40 per cent in 2022. That has allowed the resettlement of displaced populations and
the reopening of schools. Thus, in less than two years, our reconquest activities have
allowed more than 700,000 people to return to their villages and nearly 1,500 schools
to reopen their classes, offering the chance and happiness so hoped for by thousands
of students to return to school and continue their academic studies.
Those results, which command admiration and arouse much hope, were possible
thanks to the action of the Defence and Security Forces, the patriotic commitment of
the Volunteers for the Defence of the Homeland and the firm support of the
populations and the Burkinabé diaspora in a tremendous surge of solidarity. That
patriotic mobilization of all components of our people made it possible to raise more

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772416/68
than $165 million for the year 2023 alone, a figure that largely exceeded initial
forecasts. That reflects the resolve of the Burkinabé people to finance and lead the
noble fight against terrorists and their allies themselves.
At the very moment when we are reaping successes in our victorious offensive
against obscurantist forces, agencies of dubious reputations and integrity have
curiously engaged in a vast and virulent campaign of denigration and stigmatization
against our fighting forces, which they accuse of violating human rights without
having the slightest proof to produce. That orchestrated propaganda is in fact aimed
at demoralizing Burkinabé patriots and sabotaging their legitimate fight, because
quite simply those practitioners of chaos have not yet understood the dynamics under
way in the Sahel — that is to say, our desire to free ourselves from all guardianship
and paternalism.
My country takes the opportunity offered by this rostrum to respectfully express
its infinite gratitude to all those friendly countries and sincere partners that support
its cause and accompany it in the consolidation of its radiant march towards inclusive
economic and social development. I would therefore like to invite United Nations
Member States to give no credence to all the media agitation, which clearly reflects,
in essence, the distress of terrorists in disarray and their sponsors. I also reassure t hem
of the professionalism and reputation of our Defence and Security Forces,
demonstrated through their participation in peacekeeping operations, as often
recognized here in the General Assembly. The systematic training and ongoing
education of the Defence and Security Forces and the Volunteers for the Defence of
the Homeland in international humanitarian law guarantee that professional rigour in
terms of respect for human rights on a daily basis.
To the extent that there is unanimity on the need to combat international
terrorism, my country is concerned about the support given by State entities to
terrorists. Such sponsorships, which we have constantly denounced and which others
have dismissed as mere figments of the imagination, were recently revealed to the
world by a paradoxical attitude of Ukraine, a State Member of our Organization.
Indeed, by unequivocally affirming its involvement in the terrorist attacks that caused
the death of elements of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in Tinzawatene,
Mali, in July, and by acknowledging its support for international terrorism,
particularly in the Sahel, that country has opened a window on the terrorist activities
that it is carrying out in the Sahel, like other States active in the shadows of treason.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of such acts of aggression and apology for
terrorism, which violate the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
international conventions.
Those particularly serious facts are indicative of the ambitions that have
constantly marked the history of our continent, namely, its balkanization, the
assassination of its leaders, interference in the domestic politics of African States and
predation as the ultimate goal. The means to do so range from the manipulation of
national elites and regional and subregional organizations to the perpetration of proxy
wars, as is the case in the Sahel, where Ukraine and other countries finance and arm
terrorists with impunity. That reading, whose relevance is reflected in the worrying
proliferation of military bases in our subregion, also explains the possession by
criminal gangs of sophisticated and latest-generation weapons.
Faced with this new type of terrorism, the stability and foundations of our States
and our organization have been compromised. It is therefore urgent to take vigorous
action. For their part, and regarding the case of the Ukrainian aggression, the
countries of the Confederation of Sahel States referred it to the Security Council on
20 August. We are waiting for firm responses in that regard.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
17/6824-17724
Faced with the security imperatives of the Sahel, Burkina Faso, Mali and the
Niger decided in all sovereignty, on 16 September 2023, to create the Alliance of
Sahel States (AES) through the Liptako-Gourma Charter. The AES is a military
alliance for collective defence and mutual assistance to combat terrorism and
organized crime on their territory. In order to also provide appropriate responses to
the complex challenges of development, the AES countries have decided to extend
the scope of their cooperation to other priority areas in their space.
It is in that spirit that the first Summit of Heads of State of the AES was held on
6 July in Niamey. At the end of that historic Summit, Captain Ibrahim Traoré,
President of Faso and Head of State; Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition
and Head of State of Mali; and Brigadier General Abdourahmane Tiani, President of
the Conseil national pour la sauvegarde de la patrie and Head of State of the Niger,
adopted the treaty establishing the Confederation of Sahel States (AES). The popular
support and enthusiasm generated by the advent of the AES Confederation can be
explained in part by the failure and inability of subregional institutions and
mechanisms to respond to the security and legitimate concerns of our populations.
That salutary and beneficial action is aimed primarily at protecting the populations of
the Sahel already tested by the security and humanitarian crisis and against whom
deliberate murderous measures have been taken to further exacerbate their suffering.
While this session calls on us to leave no one behind, current international
events are still, unfortunately, marked by increasingly acute tensions that seriously
threaten peace and security, under the helpless gaze of the United Nations. Burkina
Faso has always promoted diplomacy to resolve such disputes peacefully. We remain
convinced that by prioritizing the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, we will
succeed in extinguishing the hotbeds of tension, whatever their scale and wherever
they occur — in Africa, Europe, the Middle East, Asia or America.
In that spirit — in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations — Burkina
Faso reiterates its support for the political process under way in Western Sahara,
conducted under the auspices of the Secretary-General with a view to reaching a
mutually acceptable and negotiated political solution, as recommended by the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
In the Middle East, Burkina Faso reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian
people, who are enduring an unprecedented tragedy. The two-State solution of Israel
and Palestine living in peace and good-neighbourliness remains the objective option
that Burkina Faso continues to support. Our acceptance of Palestine as a State
Member of the United Nations is part of that logic.
As sources of untold suffering for the most vulnerable populations, unilateral
coercive measures imposed on States must be prohibited if we want to give real and
objective content to the topic of this session. This is why we call for the immediate
lifting of economic, commercial and financial sanctions imposed on certain States
whose only fault is the search for freedom for their peoples. That is the case with
Cuba. It is also the case with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicaragua, Iran
and many other countries.
On the subject of development issues, Burkina Faso would like to point out that,
whatever their relevance, the commitments in favour of development made here at
the United Nations will have no chance of success without the good faith and
involvement of all.
With regard to the reform of our Organization, it is time for the African continent
to be able to participate fully in the Security Council, in accordance with the Common
African Position reflected in the consensus documents supporting it. That will make

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772418/68
it possible to enshrine the universal nature of the United Nations and to redress the
persistent injustice against Africa.
To conclude, I would like to point out that Burkina Faso has faith in the United
Nations. However, it hopes that the Organization’s interventions will be carried out
with respect for the sovereignty of Member States, their strategic choices and their
fundamental interests. In the Sahel, a wind of renewal and hope is blowing, sparked
by the advent of the AES Confederation. Burkina Faso remains convinced that this
new subregional integration community, which is not directed against any country or
people, can contribute, in collaboration with sincere partners, to an approach stripped
of all hypocrisy, to the fight against terrorism and insecurity in the Sahel. God bless
Burkina Faso. God bless the Confederation of Sahel States. God bless Africa. Give
me my country or give me death — we shall prevail!
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jean-Claude
Gakosso, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Congolese Abroad of the
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gakosso (Congo) (spoke in French): I would like at the outset to express
my great admiration for Mr. Philemon Yang, a person of great renown on the African
continent, brilliantly elected to the presidency of our Assembly and whom we have
seen lead our debates with great dexterity.
As most speakers have said from this rostrum, our world is indeed at a
crossroads. It is facing a sort of fatal spiral of interlocking crises and dangerous
conflicts that one might almost believe to be irreconcilable. Indeed, situations of war
or armed violence of all kinds in Ukraine, Palestine, Lebanon, the Sudan, the Sahel,
the Horn of Africa and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — situations whose
list is unfortunately not exhaustive and to which we must add the climate crisis, the
unsustainable debt burden and, of course, the apocalyptic spectre of a nuclear war —
are all existential challenges that today challenge what remains of human wisdom and
call into question what remains of our awareness of good and evil.
All those situations — as every one of us in the Hall is well aware — are largely
revealing as tributaries to human vanity. They are the faithful reflection of the
irrepressible propensity of some of us to dominate absolutely and to possess
absolutely. They are a pernicious vice that certainly has its roots in the genesis of
humankind, but which we have still not managed to eradicate.
From this rostrum, in the name of peace, I call for a recovery on the part of all
those who exercise political power throughout the world.
In the name of peace, I call for the collective wisdom, the cardinal virtue, that
the ancients lavished on all our societies in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Americas and
the Pacific.
In the name of peace, I call for full awareness of the fact that we are only one
human race, embarked on the same ship, linked by a community of destiny and bound
by reciprocal obligations and shared duties.
I call quite simply for universal fraternity, that generous utopia, sublimated in
the time of the Enlightenment and which in 1948 nourished the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, which became the credo of all humanists.
Our world vitally needs to reconnect with peace; if it does not, it is heading
straight for its doom. Peace is not an option. It cannot be an alternative. Peace is an
imperative, and that imperative must be imposed on everyone, everywhere and in all
places.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
19/6824-17724
It is precisely that imperative of peace that today drives the mediation efforts of
the African Union in Libya, a country where President Denis Sassou Nguesso, on
whose behalf I speak, has been working tirelessly for years for comprehensive peace
and inclusive reconciliation. Through perseverance and indomitability, the African
Union High-Level Committee on Libya, which he chairs, has managed to bring
yesterday’s enemy brothers together around the same table. The Committee has
encouraged them to talk to each other. It has encouraged them to forgive each other
and persuaded them to give precedence to justice, the foundation of the rule of law to
which Libya aspires, rising from its ashes like the invincible phoenix. That peace,
stubbornly sought and patiently cultivated for years, should soon materialize in Addis
Ababa through the solemn signing by all parties of a charter of reconciliation. Thus,
the path leading to the long-awaited general, free and democratic elections will be
largely marked out.
The renewal of multilateralism underlying the Pact for the Future (resolution
79/1) that we have just adopted clearly involves the affirmation of a multipolar world,
a paragon of the diversity of cultural expressions. It involves a just, stable and
equitable world, where all the peoples of the world live together, without any
distinction as to race, tradition or religion.
There is therefore an urgent need to reform the international institutions that
arose from the Second World War, starting with the Security Council, which must
embrace the face of our cosmopolitan world through a fairer representation of
peoples. I recall Africa’s legitimate plea for two seats in the permanent membership
category in the Council, with veto power. In that regard, my country reaffirms the
centrality and immutability of the Common African Position, as set out in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
The time has come for Africa to take its rightful place in the concert of nations.
It is up to us, representatives of the allied nations here, to make the choice of honour.
It is up to us to enter history through the front door by distancing ourselves fore ver
from medieval prejudices and abstruse stereotypes about Africa. It is up to us to
consolidate and amplify our generous convergences, which trace the true paths of
human history.
There will be no sustainable development on any continent if our planet is not
protected from the destructive factors of the environment. Climate change is today an
existential threat. That threat, as we know, is multidimensional — rising
temperatures, melting glaciers, catastrophic floods, widespread desertification, the
destruction of biodiversity, the outbreak of epidemics and the exodus of populations
that all this entails are the perfect illustration of the fragility that now characterizes
our beautiful blue planet.
The community of nations has little choice but to act, to act here and now and
to act without hesitation, with rigour and responsibility in order to spare our world an
irreparable cataclysmic upheaval. One of the axes of that action is of course the
mindful afforestation and widespread reforestation of the planet. Each party must do
its part in the building. The Republic of the Congo and the African Union came to
this seventy-ninth session with a well-developed strategy, which my delegation has
already included in the roster of upcoming committee work as a draft resolution. That
strategy, for which I seek the advance support of our Assembly, is aimed at a
substantial, progressive and irreversible increase in the world’s forest area through
international cooperation that harmoniously pools afforestation and reforestation
activities across the globe in a united, coordinated, concerted and consensual
approach among States.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772420/68
I cannot leave this rostrum without returning to a situation that constantly
challenges our conscience, a situation in the face of which, morally, we cannot give
up. It is the everlasting blockade inflicted on Cuba, whose duration is gradually
moving towards a century and which causes untold suffering to the innocent
populations of that country. The blockade, which many Americans themselves find
anachronistic, should have been purely and simply abolished a long time ago. Once
again, I appeal to the wisdom of the American people and the sagacity of its leaders,
most of whom, as we know, have nothing to do with that sort of residual avatar of the
Cold War. I urge the United States Government to turn forever that painful page in
the history of the two peoples, both born of the mixed race and the blessed cultural
osmosis among Europe, Africa and pre-Columbian America.
In conclusion, I hope to see all the peoples of the world resolutely engage in the
fight for the emergence of a new humanity: a peaceful humanity that definitively turns
its back on war and death and pools its solidarity; an authentic humanity that
mercilessly fights the endemic poverty that wreaks so much havoc in developing
countries, that is a real cancer in our global society and that is one of the main causes
of the frustrations and violence which so obscure the horizon of hope; a fraternal
humanity, as imagined in this same city by the great artist John Lennon; and finally,
a rainbow humanity, as dreamed of, from the depths of his prison, by Nelson Mandela.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Attaf,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and National Community Abroad of the Democratic
Republic of Algeria.
Mr. Attaf (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): As we meet once again in the halls of our
United Nations, our world is at a very delicate, sensitive and dangerous juncture; a
juncture marked by the accumulation of conflicts, crises and wars, the widening gap
in development disparities between the North and the South, and the exacerbation of
climate change and environmental risks of all kinds and forms; a juncture that reveals
the magnitude of the shortcomings that have afflicted the collective security system
in light of the tendency to resolve disputes by force, the excessive and selective resort
to unilateral punitive measures, the failure to fulfil obligations undertaken, the
disregard for international legitimacy, the spread of polarization, the accompanying
absence of the role of the Security Council and the erosion of multilateral
international action as a whole. Last but not least, it is a juncture that puts to the test
the entire system of international relations, with its rules, principles and controls
codified in the Charter of the United Nations and mechanisms, structures and
institutions that rely on it, which were established to serve the aspirations, ambitions
and goals that bind our countries.
From that perspective, looking ahead to the eighth decade of the United Nations
must be an opportunity to renew our commitment to the international system that
unites us, based on the rule of law, not the rule of force, and on the force of law, not
the law of force, and on the force of logic, not the logic of force. We need more than
ever today to renew our commitment and adherence to the United Nations Charter
and the rules of international law, before which we are all equal, and to respect and
abide by them.
The ongoing genocidal war in Gaza, which has raged for almost a whole year,
and its recent spillover into the West Bank and recently into Lebanon, and the
multifaceted Israeli escalation on multiple fronts throughout the region could not have
happened if the international community had taken a firm stance at the time, imposing
on the Israeli settlement occupation the same measures that have been imposed on
others, namely, the punitive and deterrent measures enshrined in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The international community today should hasten to
put an end to the hell inflicted on the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and to rein in

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
21/6824-17724
the Israeli occupier and its desire to plunge the Middle East region into a cycle of
crises, conflicts and endless wars.
The international community should also realize that it is facing a critical and
pivotal stage in the history of the Palestinian cause, a stage that does not accept a
return to the status quo ante; a stage that does not accept hesitation or inaction in
supporting the Palestinian national project; a stage that does not tolerate
procrastination or delay in supporting the move towards the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State as a just, lasting and final solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
From this rostrum at the seventy-eighth session (see A/78/PV.5), the President
of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, appealed to the United Nations to
expedite the admission of the State of Palestine to full membership. He did so in the
context of less turbulent, crisis-ridden and tragic circumstances in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the rest of the Palestinian neighbourhood. Today, as the
Palestinian cause is enduring its darkest historical phase ever, that approach has
become imperative, urgent and self-evident. The full membership of the State of
Palestine in our Organization remains a crucial step towards preserving the two -State
solution and addressing all that the Israeli occupation is preparing to thwart. It is a
step towards safeguarding the tenets of a resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and
the foundations of security and stability in the region.
As for developments in our regional neighbourhood, Algeria remains firmly
convinced that confronting the complex challenges facing the countries and peoples
of the region requires international support and global solidarity to meet the various
problems that are weighing heavily on our pan-African space. In the same vein, my
country aspires to end colonization by closing the final page on colonialism, which is
still regrettably manifest in the Western Sahara. We offer all our support to the
Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara in their efforts to
enable the two parties, the Kingdom of Morocco and the POLISARIO Front, to return
to the path of direct negotiations with the aim of reaching a political solution that
would guarantee the Sahrawi people the exercise of their inalienable right to self-
determination, which is not subject to the statute of limitations. As for those who seek
to entrench the colonial status quo by buying time, falsifying damning data and
stepping up their desperate manoeuvres to distract attention from the clear truth, we
affirm that the phenomenon of colonialism is destined to disappear, no matter how
long it takes, and that the legitimate rights of the Sahrawi people will be exercised
sooner or later.
As for neighbouring Libya, Algeria calls for the expeditious elimination of the
scourge of foreign interventions, which is exhausting that brotherly country’s
resources and fuelling divisions and conflicts among its people. Only then can our
Libyan brothers come together on a consensus that will begin to achieve the goals off
national reconciliation and facilitate the transition towards organizing free, fair and
transparent elections, all in the service of the highest goal we desire from the bottom
of our hearts, which is the unification of Libya and its people, territory, Government
and institutions.
At the continental level, Algeria is pursuing its efforts and endeavours to make
a qualitative contribution to comprehensive African action in the light of the priorities
that the continental agenda has decisively and unequivocally defined. First and
foremost, Africa looks forward to activating African-led solutions and to developing
and implementing them to end conflicts and resolve the various crises and disputes
afflicting the countries and peoples of the continent.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772422/68
Secondly, Africa looks forward to addressing economic development and
joining the revolutions currently taking place in the fields of artificial intelligence,
digitalization and renewable energy.
Thirdly, Africa is looking forward to advancing its strategic priorities that lie at
the heart of the reform of the international financial, monetary and banking
institutions in order to improve African representation in those institutions, the
structural reform of global debt and adequate international financing that is
appropriate to the Africa’s development requirements.
Fourthly and finally, Africa is looking forward to correcting the historical
injustice imposed on it in the Security Council and being able to occupy its rightful
place in that key United Nations organ, complementing its recent accession to the
Group of 20 as a permanent member.
With the same commitment at the continental level, Algeria is pursuing its
endeavours and efforts to establish a balanced, beneficial and meaningful partnership
in the Sahel-Saharan region, which is experiencing fragile conditions as countries
endure an aggravation of political unrest, growing terrorist threats, the spread of
poverty, the absence of prospects for sustainable development and the exacerbation
of the phenomenon of climate change. In the face of those challenges, Algeria
reiterates its full solidarity with all countries and peoples of the Sahel-Saharan region
and affirms its firm conviction that its security, stability and well-being are an integral
part of the security, stability and well-being of the neighbouring African region.
One representative of a State of that region dared to brazenly attack my country
with vile language that should not be dignified with a reply and is not befitting of this
noble rostrum. My country will not respond to such low, ill-mannered language except
with polite, refined language that sincerely reflects its loyalty and devotion to the
deep-seated ties that unite it with the countries and peoples of the region, which
cannot be shaken by transient circumstantial factors or the trivial concerns of those
who stand behind its incitement. My country is resolute and extends its hand to our
brothers as we seek to build with them a Sahel that enjoys security, safety and
tranquillity.
Today, Algeria is taking firm and solid steps on the right path established by the
President of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, to strengthen the political and
institutional stability of the country, build a strong and diversified national economy,
end dependence on the hydrocarbon sector and enhance the social character of the
Algerian State as a fixed principle and solid legacy of our glorious revolution of
liberation. That approach has yielded its first fruits in strengthening the security and
stability of the country, consolidating its democratic path, particularly in the recent
presidential elections, and laying the foundations for a comprehensive economic
renaissance that has restored our national economy’s position in Africa among the
three strongest economies on the continent and opened the door to opportunities for
cooperation and profitable partnership for all parties in it.
In the light of those achievements, Algeria is working to strengthen its relations
with all sisterly, friendly and partner countries in its neighbourhood and beyond. My
country also seeks to continue working closely with all States Members of our
Organization that share our commitment to and concern for upholding the principles
and values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Although the current
situation in our world is difficult and dangerous and is capable of breaking the
strongest will and discouraging the most ardent determination, we remain very
confident that hope will survive and that ambition will remain. From the heart of
crises, opportunities are born; from the womb of suffering, determination is
sharpened; and from the heart of adversity, hope shines. We hope from the bottom of

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
23/6824-17724
our hearts that we will have a better world for current generations and for future
generations.
The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Albert Shingiro,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation of the Republic of
Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a great honour and a privilege
for me to address the Assembly on behalf of Mr. Evariste Ndayishimiye, President of
the Republic of Burundi, who could not be with us this morning and who has honoured
me to represent him in these meetings to raise the voice and position of Burundi on
the global challenges facing the world today.
Allow me, Mr. President, to offer you my warm congratulations on your
outstanding election to the presidency of the General Assembly at this session. Your
wisdom, your long and rich political and diplomatic experience, your high sense of
listening and your qualities as a seasoned negotiator are for us the guarantee of the
success of these meetings. You can always count on the full support and cooperation
of Burundi throughout your mandate.
Your predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis, deserves equal admiration and
recognition for having invested himself in the accomplishment of his mission with
brilliance during the session that we have just closed.
At the same time, I address a well-earned tribute to Secretary-General António
Guterres for his services to humankind through his courageous action in progress to
make the United Nations an Organization close to the people, despite the complex
global context in which it operates.
The President’s slogan for this session, “Unity in diversity, for the advancement
of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”, is
all the more timely as the world we live in today is moving rapidly towards disunity
and the questioning of the values of peace, solidarity and mutual understanding. That
disunity is coupled with a new type of radicalism that prevents Member States from
agreeing on how to tackle global challenges in a spirit of compromise and mutual
trust.
Indeed, today more than ever, most of us act as if we were alone in the world
and as if others did not exist or did not matter. Solidarity has become a rare commodity
at the very moment when we need it most. The undermining of positive values
throughout the world has become the currency of choice. However, we know that all
conflicts that the world has known, be they direct or proxy, proceed from the same
logic — the denial of others, their interests and their very identity, be they cultural,
religious or civilizational. In short, the loss of trust, tensions around geostrategic
positions and deliberate disinformation are polarizing countries and paralysing
societies across the world at an increasingly worrying pace.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
As is necessarily appropriate in such cases, my country, Burundi, strongly
condemns all those who seek to impose on others their points of view, their practices
or their own values and thoughts through muscle diplomacy and political
conditionalities of development aid, while forgetting that the world is plural and that
difference in diversity is a great asset and a driving force for development for
economic growth and the flourishing of our societies. Properly understood at its true
value, diversity in all its dimensions is a source of varied possibilities, opportunities
and inspirations. The wealth of points of view, experiences and lessons learned brings
a variety of ideas, knowledge, understanding and acceptance of others that can

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772424/68
significantly improve a society’s ability to prosper, to understand the different
perspectives of the contemporary world in which we live, and thus to live in peace
and harmony with its immediate and distant environment.
As we know, cultural diversity and values constitute a powerful lever for
building links beyond differences. They unite populations and thereby support social
cohesion, peace, security and peaceful coexistence. Despite that unifying function,
the past 20 years have been marked by the increasing instrumentalization of culture
and values for the purposes of division and tension. Because of their significance and
intrinsic connection with populations, cultural diversity and the values we hold dear
have increasingly been placed at the forefront of conflicts and used as a tool of
division, even a weapon of war, above all to dominate weakened societies,
particularly in the most fragile regions of the world. That self -centred exploitation of
culture and values has contributed not only to the prolongation of crises and conflicts,
but also to deterring the exercise of human rights, including economic, social and
cultural rights. Today more than ever, bridging the gap among cultures, values and
civilizations is urgent and necessary to establish peace, stability, solidarity and
inclusive development that leaves no one behind.
The world we live in today needs more than ever a consensual approach to face
such major challenges as raging conflicts, intensifying natural disasters and climate
change, omnipresent poverty and inequalities, the mistrust and dissensions that divide
the world, the crumbling spirit of compromise and waning international solidarity,
not to mention the Sustainable Development Goals, which are very far from being
achieved.
With regard to its role in building a better future and a world order based on the
rule of law — a peaceful, equitable, prosperous and united world — Burundi, my
country, is pursuing its ambition to strengthen relations of friendship and cooperation
based on the principle of mutual respect and the sovereign equality of States to make
Burundi a country that is a friend to all and an enemy to none. Burundi is a true
supporter of a multilateralism in which all countries, regardless of their size and level
of development, have a role to play in addressing the challenges of the moment that
President Yang and the Secretary-General have already rightly mentioned. In that
regard, Burundi opposes the unilateral measures imposed by certain actors, which can
lead to the erosion and destruction of the social fabric in the targeted countries.
As for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, if
nothing is done to reverse the current trends we will gradually move towards the
renunciation of the promise made to humankind in 2015 in this very Hall. With only
six years to go before the deadline, the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024
clearly shows that only 17 per cent to 18 per cent of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) are on track, nearly half have made little or moderate progress, while
more than a third have stagnated or even regressed. Faced with such an alarming
situation, we, the people, have no more time to lose. Let us act together and quickly
to save the future generation, which will judge us by our actions in the event of
inaction.
It is supremely crucial that the international community redouble its efforts to
address the various needs and challenges encountered, with a particular focus on
countries in special situations, such as least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, with the aim of reversing
the trend and the hope to leave no one behind, as we collectively decided in 2015
through the 2030 Agenda.
At the national level, Burundi, like all other nations, is working hard to
significantly improve the quality of life of its population. The Burundian people

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
25/6824-17724
firmly believe that the only path that will lead them to true political independence
necessarily passes through economic independence. To that end, the Government of
Burundi, under the enlightened leadership of the President of the Republic, Mr.
Evariste Ndayishimiye, is committed to making the peace and security already
achieved profitable, has set out in the ambitious and achievable vision of making
Burundi an emerging country by 2040 and a developed country by 2060. The goal
sought in that reference document is to build a nation characterized by the well-being
of the population, a sustained increase in production and structural changes leading
to an increase in life expectancy, the satisfaction of basic needs and the reduction of
unemployment and poverty in all its forms, dimensions and manifestations. By 2040,
Burundi plans to be a peaceful country where everyone lives in decent conditions and
no one dies from an avoidable cause, and with a competitive economy driven by the
agrifood and industrial sectors with high added value and by mining for the benefit
of society, all in a preserved natural environment and with consideration of the gender
dimension and equity.
In matters of peace and security, Burundi, always siding with solutions and not
with problems, reiterates its commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflicts
throughout the world with the tools that preventive diplomacy puts at our disposal,
namely, dialogue, cooperation, consultation and negotiation. Representatives are well
aware that without peace, no development is possible, and that without development
peace becomes utopian, both being two sides of the same coin.
The terrorist threat and the dangers associated with violent extremism have
grown in recent years, with increasing ramifications at the local, regional and
international levels. Faced with that existential threat, Burundi is committed to
maintaining and strengthening its collaboration with other nations to prevent and
combat terrorism and violent extremism through its substantial contribution to peace
operations and the fight against terrorism, particularly in Somalia, the Central African
Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to support those
brother countries in their legitimate efforts to restore peace and State authority
throughout their territories.
The climate crisis is besetting the planet before our very eyes and sustainable
solutions are slow to come, due to a lack of financing for climate action capable of
helping countries of the global South to face the threefold planetary crisis of climate
change, pollution and loss of biodiversity. Burundi, like other countries of the
subregion, is increasingly affected by climate change, despite its minimal
contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions. The frequency of climatic
phenomena such as floods, landslides, drought and the rise in the level of Lake
Tanganyika is increasing. Those events disrupt agricultural cycles, leading to crop
losses, food insecurity and the degradation of local ecosystems. We advocate a
simplification of deadlines to allow seriously impacted countries to receive green
financing to limit the adverse effects of climate change on the implementation of the
SDGs.
To contribute to the climate edifice, Burundi, like other signatory countries of
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, has committed itself through its nationally
determined contributions document and has integrated environmental protection,
strengthened resilience to climate change and food security into its national policies
and its Emerging Country in 2040 and Developed Country in 2060 vision.
As we know, climate hazards affect more than the physical environment; they
also affect the good health of populations. To that end, Burundi has taken health
measures into account in its climate change mitigation plan and broken the record in
the recent report of the Global Climate Change Alliance by climbing to the top of the
list of countries that have most comprehensively taken the health of the population

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772426/68
into account in their mitigation plan. Moreover, several initiatives for the protection
and restoration of landscapes have been taken, including a vast national reforestation
programme called Ewe Burundi Urambaye — Green Burundi — the promotion of
agroforestry and the tracing of contour lines with the involvement of all sections of
the population.
I now come to the issue of human rights on the list of challenges to be met. For
Burundi, dignity — as highlighted in our central theme — begins with the promotion
and protection of human rights, which are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
closely linked. My country, Burundi, firmly believes that human rights must be
strengthened through adherence to the fundamental principles of universality,
transparency, impartiality, non-selectivity, non-politicization and objectivity, as well
as the rejection of the practice of double standards. The special mechanisms
sometimes imposed to regulate geopolitics in certain regions of the world must give
way to dialogue and cooperation.
In that context, Burundi must be treated fairly by the Human Rights Council in
Geneva and calls on certain actors to avoid continually saddling us with special
political mechanisms without any added value in terms of the enjoyment of human
rights in all their components. In that regard, I encourage the initiators of such
projects — they know who they are — to withdraw the initiative to extend the
mandate of the so-called Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Burundi,
because such an attitude, which seeks to regulate domestic politics in Burundi,
generates unnecessary and above all avoidable tensions between our country and the
initiators of that politically motivated, cynical and immoral project.
International migration is a worldwide reality that has been around ever since
the world was created. It affects our countries, our communities, migrants and their
families in different and sometimes unpredictable ways. Burundi recognizes the need
for a global approach to human mobility and strengthened bilateral, regional and
international cooperation with a view to facilitating safe, orderly and regular
migration. At the national level, Burundi is signing cooperation agreements with
destination countries on labour migration. That cooperative approach seeks to ensure
the legal, social and human rights protection of migrant workers and thereby to
significantly counter the traffic in human beings.
The issue of multilateralism has been the subject of particular attention since
the opening of our session. After 79 years of existence of the United Nations, the
shared observation is that despite its limitations, which everyone knows,
multilateralism has contributed to bringing undeniable results to certain global
problems. Let us acknowledge them. The most recent example that multilateralism is
not dead and buried was the adoption by consensus in this very Hall, on 22 September,
of our Pact for the Future and its annexes (resolution 79/1), a concise and action -
oriented document.
However, despite that encouraging result, there are early signs of the progressive
weakening of the spirit of compromise and indifference to collective rules. In an
increasingly globalized world, where interdependence is robust, no State, however
powerful, can hope to resolve all the challenges it faces alone. States must preserve
and strengthen mutual commitment and adopt a more coordinated approach, based on
the rules of the game, to avoid unilateral actions that, as we all know, often manifest
themselves in the form of blatant interference in the internal affairs of other countries,
in violation of the principles and values conveyed by the Charter of the United
Nations.
Regarding the reform of the Security Council, the endless negotiations of which
have become elastic, my country Burundi, through me, reaffirms its commitment to

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
27/6824-17724
the Common African Position reflected in the Ezulwini Consensus. It cannot be said
often enough that the current multilateral system is showing its limits in effectively
ensuring global governance. The notorious and atrocious injustice committed against
Africa, the only continent absent from the Security Council in the category of
permanent membership and inadequately represented in the category of non -
permanent membership, must end. Seeking to perpetuate the exclusion of more than
1.2 billion inhabitants from the table where major decisions concerning them are
taken is an attitude that is simply unacceptable.
Access to information in a universal, equitable and financially affordable
manner, as well as to the instruments providing access to it, is also one of the major
challenges of modern times. The Internet claims to represent a relationship of
rapprochement between spaces and peoples, but the so-called spider web favours rich
countries while developing countries are still poorly connected, particularly in Africa.
At a time when the world and trade are becoming increasingly digital, it is becoming
imperative for all countries to have access to the Internet, including artificial
intelligence, which is revolutionizing the world as we speak. The increasingly
widening and gaping abyss between the countries of the global North and the global
South is causing the latter to lose a large number of social, scientific and economic
opportunities. As leaving no one behind is one of the pillars of United Nations action,
it is more than urgent that the digital divide be bridged in the legitimate interest of
current and future generations.
I cannot conclude without informing the Assembly of and, above all, without
reiterating Burundi’s commitment to implementing the theme “Unity in diversity, for
the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone,
everywhere”.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Mélanie Joly, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
Ms. Joly (Canada) (spoke in French): It is an honour for me to speak to the
General Assembly on behalf of Canada and on behalf of Canadians. I would like to
underscore that I am joining the Assembly on the traditional territory of the Lenape
people. That recognition is important because today in Canada we mark the National
Day for Truth and Reconciliation, when we acknowledge and commemorate the
indigenous peoples who came before us and continue to live here. We acknowledge
the pain caused by decades of abuse, neglect and racism. This is al so an opportunity
for us to commit to doing better and to righting the wrongs of the past so we can move
forward together.
(spoke in English)
Ours is a country based on the rights and freedoms that are enshrined in our
constitutional Charter. A core reason that Canada is a prosperous society is that,
beyond offering the freedom to pursue a better life for you and your family, it is also
a way for us provide freedom from the barriers that prevent you from enjoying a better
life — freedom from fear, violence, intimidation and discrimination; freedoms that
foster a sense of inclusivity and belonging; freedom that protects the vulnerable and
builds stronger communities.
Far too often, though, some of the loudest voices claiming to speak for freedom
are the ones trying to redefine that word for their own purposes. They claim freedom
as an excuse to do as they wish without any regard for the freedom of others. That is
certainly not how we should define freedom. They hide behind the word to tell us that
everything is broken and to spread disinformation, and they parrot the lines fed to
them by those who wish to interfere in our elections and undermine our democracy.
They weaponize the term “freedom” to further marginalize those in the most

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772428/68
vulnerable situations, to justify spreading hate and even to deny people their right to
make choices about their own bodies, including limits on reproductive rights. At the
end of the day, through all the noise, what they really mean to say is that freedom is
for some, but not for all. Often, the people who claim to speak for freedom are the
same people who want the Government to decide who people can love, who they are
or even what they can wear. We see it in our country. We see it around the world. At
the international level, we see it when groups or countries declare that international
law does not apply to them.
In Afghanistan, we see it taken to its extreme as the Taliban continue to impose
inhumane rules against women and girls, banning them from being in public so they
are invisible and robbing young girls of the fundamental right to an education. How
is that respecting human dignity? How is that protecting the best interests of their
people? They must be held accountable. Last week, Canada joined Australia,
Germany and the Netherlands, with the support of 22 other countries, to take steps to
hold Afghanistan accountable under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women. The Taliban cannot make international law
disappear through simple decrees. Canada is a country that values freedom from
oppression, not the freedom to oppress others. There should be nothing controversial
about protecting human rights, including the dignity of all men and women.
With regard to Haiti, the world cannot sit idly by as people suffer.
(spoke in French)
Unchecked gang violence and corruption in Haiti have created a catastrophe for
the population, which is plunged into a state of deep insecurity in which civilians fall
victim to bullets and children die of hunger. Canada has always maintained that the
solution to the crisis must come from Haitians for the benefit of Haitians. To that end,
the Transitional Presidential Council and the transitional Government are working to
restore order, but they cannot do it alone. The Haitian people need the Multinational
Security Support mission to work with the Haitian National Police, not only to help
them restore order but also to meet the basic needs of the population. That is why
Canada has invested more than $100 million to support it. Canada is doing its part.
We must all show the Haitian people that we are not going to abandon them. The
Security Council must be clear on that, and I thank it for the decision it took earlier
today. I would like to thank the Caribbean Community and Kenya for the essential
role they are playing in the response to the crisis. Together, we can achieve lasting
peace and stability in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
What is happening in the Middle East is an unspeakable tragedy. Thousands
have been killed in Israel, Gaza and Lebanon, including many Canadians. This is a
senseless war that goes against the dignity of human beings. The suffering on all sides
must end. What the world continues to witness is a repeated cycle of violence in which
civilians pay the heaviest price. Canada is joining those urging Israel and Hizbullah
to accept an immediate ceasefire. We need to create space for peace talks and save
lives. There cannot be war in Lebanon — full stop. Security Council resolutions must
be respected. Families in southern Lebanon and families in northern Israel must be
able to safely return to their homes. We have and always will insist that civilians be
protected, wherever they are from.
Next week will mark one year since the terrorist attacks by Hamas against Israel.
Last March, I visited Kibbutz Kfar Aza, one of the communities attacked on 7 October
2023. I met Ayalet, a mother grieving for her son, who was brutally murdered in the
attack; he died protecting his fiancée. Ayalet recounted the terror of that day, the
search for loved ones in burned homes. As she spoke about the horrors of 7 October,

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
29/6824-17724
we heard the bombs as they landed on Gaza nearby and felt the ground shudder. In
that moment, our sense of the duality of the tragedy befalling the Israeli and
Palestinian people was profound. It is a moment I will never forget. The situation in
Gaza is inhumane. The level of suffering is unacceptable, and it must stop. Innocent
Palestinians, including women and children, cannot pay the price of defeating Hamas.
That must end. A ceasefire is needed immediately. Hostages must be released. That
will require both sides to make real efforts.
For lasting peace, Canada has long advocated a two-State solution. We believe
that Israelis and Palestinians alike have the right to exist. We all know that a
negotiated agreement is the best chance for Israelis and Palestinians to live side -by-
side in peace and security. Unfortunately, Hamas, a terrorist organization, continues
to operate in Gaza, refuses to release hostages and refuses to lay down its weapons.
Meanwhile, the Government of Israel is against the creation of a Palestinian State.
Violence against Palestinians by extremist settlers and the expansion of settlements
by Israel in the West Bank continue unabated. That is unacceptable.
Canada supports the creation of a Palestinian State. That is why we are providing
security and development support to the Palestinians themselves. We will officially
recognize the State of Palestine at the right time, when it is most conducive to building
a lasting peace and not necessarily as the last step of a negotiated process. More than
anything, the conflict has led to unspeakable pain. Communities are hurting. People
have the right to protest peacefully, but nobody has the freedom to intimidate other s.
Polarization is a real problem. Division is real. We have a collective responsibility to
bring people together.
It has now been two and a half years since Russia launched its illegal invasion
of Ukraine. The human cost continues to grow. No country has the right or the
freedom to invade its neighbour. There is no freedom to impose one’s will on others.
That aggression is a blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Russia
needs to get out of Ukraine now. The Ukrainian people have the right to be free from
fear and from aggression. They have the right to decide what their own future should
be.
We all know that if Russia’s aggression goes unchecked here, it will continue.
Many countries of the region and the hemisphere are wondering if they will be next.
The world must not back down in denouncing that unjustifiable aggression. Canada
will not back down from its support for Ukraine. At the end of October, Canada will
host a conference, co-organized with Norway and Ukraine, on the human dimension
of Ukraine’s 10-point peace formula. We will focus on the return of children to their
families and on deported civilians and prisoners of war. Every one of those affected
by the war is entitled to freedom from violence and from being forced from their
home.
(spoke in French)
The issues I have just raised create immense challenges. This institution has a
role to play in helping us to work together toward solutions. Critics of the United
Nations accuse it of being incapable of solving the problems currently facing the
world. Worse still, some more conspiratorial critics even believe that the United
Nations is the cause of many of those problems. Both ignore the reality and the
strength of the Organization. The United Nations is a unique forum that allows us to
come together and talk to each other on an equal footing to try to iron out our
differences, which are indeed sometimes profound, through discussion and
consensus-building. That is why Canada supported the adoption of the Pact for the
Future (resolution 79/1) at the Summit of the Future last week. The Pact is a starting
point as we work together to ensure the sustainability of the Organization. The United

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772430/68
Nations is not a perfect Organization, it is true, but progress is possible. As the
Secretary-General has said, “We cannot create a future fit for our grandchildren with
systems built for our grandparents.” Let us build that future together.
For almost 80 years, no woman has held the post of Secretary-General. That is
unacceptable. Last week, with my colleague from Jamaica, I had the great honour of
welcoming to Toronto 15 women Foreign Ministers from the four corners of the
world. Our conclusion was clear. The next head of this illustrious institution must be
a woman. It is high time we were able to respectfully say, at this rostrum and around
the world, “Madam Secretary-General”. I would say the same for the post of President
of the General Assembly. With all the respect I have for you, Mr. Vice-President, and
for the President of the General Assembly, I hope that next year representatives will
address “Madam President”. I know that many of us share that wish.
I should like to tell the General Assembly about my mother. She will be so proud
that I am talking about her at the United Nations. My mother and grandmother are
among the millions of women around the world who have fought hard for equal rights.
They have done so alongside the mothers and grandmothers of many of the people in
the Hall. Mum recently told me that we were now part of the “consolidation
generation”. She was right.
(spoke in English)
Being part of our generation means that we need to consolidate the gains that
have been made over time and fight against those who are trying to roll back that
progress. It also means that we need to continue to fight so that women and girls
everywhere have the right to make choices about their own bodies and their own lives.
We see the difference which the gap in freedoms creates. When women are robbed of
the right to decide when to have children, they lose out on education and job
opportunities. When women do not have access to safe abortions, their lives are put
at risk. When women are denied access to safe contraception and fertility treatments,
they lose the power to make choices that have the most profound impacts on their
lives. Attacks on sexual and reproductive health rights are an attack on equality rights.
They are an affront to basic dignity.
(spoke in French)
We must always have the right to choose for ourselves, which means we must
be able to decide which contraception to use or whether to have an abortion or even
to choose assisted reproduction. We women have the right to be equal in everything —
in education, in employment and in every other opportunity. We are women and proud
of it. We can never turn back. Together, we must keep moving forward for our sisters,
our daughters and our granddaughters.
(spoke in English)
Two years ago, I stood here and said that countries around the world were faced
with a choice (see A/77/PV.14). We still have that choice today. We can choose a
world where rules can be broken by the powerful, bringing us back to darker times of
tension and conflict, or we can choose a world that upholds human rights,
opportunities for all, peace and prosperity; a world where people work together to
solve problems. Canada will work with partners to move us beyond this moment of
crisis. A new future is being shaped. We must not fail.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Seán Fleming, Minister of State of Ireland.
Mr. Fleming (Ireland): We gather at a very important moment. World leaders
have agreed the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which charts a way forward to

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
31/6824-17724
meet the challenges facing us as a global community. To do so, we must honour
existing commitments, including the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and be ready to adapt to new and emerging
challenges. It requires us to address the interlocking crises of climate change, conflict,
hunger, injustice and underdevelopment, and it requires us to protect the means to
achieve progress
For generations, the multilateral system, with the Charter of the United Nations
at its heart, has driven our best advances. I believe that we have a shared responsibility
to bring about a world in which each of us can thrive in safety, dignity and peace. We
are accountable to those who will follow us, and accountable to each other to uphold
the United Nations Charter, to stand up for international law, to ensure the peaceful
settlement of disputes, to defend the universal and indivisible nature of human ri ghts,
and to pass on to the next generation a functioning multilateral system.
The rules-based international order and the international human rights system
are our greatest assets in achieving and sustaining peace. Human rights provide a
common binding framework. We believe that every State has a duty to support and
strengthen the international human rights regime and to defend it where it is
challenged. That is why Ireland is seeking membership of the Human Rights Council
for the period 2027-2029. We are doing so because we are deeply committed to human
rights. We wish to further contribute to the United Nations human rights system and
the valuable work of the Human Rights Council. We hope that we can count on the
support of many in the Hall who share our belief in the values and principles we have
collectively established.
We also have a duty to uphold international law and the international legal order.
Ireland is fully committed to supporting the essential work of the International Court
of Justice and calls on all States to abide by its rulings. Ireland is also wholly
committed to the international criminal justice system. The International Criminal
Court is the cornerstone of that system and must be allowed to pursue its mandate
without fear or favour. We strongly condemn all attempts to intimidate or threaten the
International Criminal Court, its officials or those cooperating with the Court. There
can be no impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern.
We are seeing a global backlash against the human rights of women and girls.
The gender persecution in Afghanistan stands out for its cruelty and must be
denounced. In too many parts of our world, we see hard-won progress threatened and
even reversed. We cannot accept that. Our commitment to gender equality must be
non-negotiable. We must also address the unacceptable rise in attacks on the rights to
life, liberty and security of LGBTQI+ people in all corners of the world, and we must
unequivocally condemn all forms of racism, intolerance and hatred, including
antisemitism, anti-Muslim hatred and the persecution of Christians.
We are already seeing the destructive impacts of climate change. It is clear that
climate change is a driver and multiplier of instability and conflict. Ireland worked
hard to address that during our recent term on the Security Council. Climate change
threatens each and every one of us, from small island developing States in the Pacific,
the Caribbean and elsewhere, to countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Those who have contributed least to climate change are among the most
vulnerable to its impacts. That is an enormous injustice. As we approach the twenty -
ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, we must do everything we can to reduce fossil fuel emissions. As a
fellow island State, Ireland is working to support adaptation and loss and damage
activities. We need collective action, at speed and at scale, to avert the most
catastrophic impacts of the climate crisis.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772432/68
Ireland and our European Union partners will play our role. At the United
Nations last year, and again in the Pact for the Future, we have recommitted to the
Sustainable Development Goals. Now we need to act with urgency as progress on
those targets falters. Ireland’s international development budget is at record levels
and, per capita, we are one of the strongest providers of humanitarian assistance on
the planet. We are firmly committed to global solidarity and to reaching the furthest
behind first. We will maintain our focus on action to end hunger and malnutrition,
and especially the needless global scandal of child wasting and stunting. We will
remain champions of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls.
We face the very real prospect of regional war in the Middle East. I am deeply
concerned at the spiralling violence and the situation in Lebanon. Hizbullah has long
been a malign actor in Lebanon and in the region. We have consistently condemned
its attacks. But massive and ongoing Israeli airstrikes on densely populated areas are
causing the indiscriminate deaths of civilians and destruction on a vast scale.
Hundreds of thousands have been forced to flee. A ground war would be truly
catastrophic.
All parties to conflict have an obligation to abide by international humanitarian
law. There can be no exceptions. I call on all parties to immediately de -escalate, to
step back from the brink and to exercise restraint, and I call on all States that have
influence, including Iran, to use it constructively. We need to create the space for
political and diplomatic solutions and to ensure that urgent humanitarian assistance
can get to those in desperate need. The violence must stop now.
The scale of death, destruction and human misery in Gaza is truly horrific and
completely unacceptable. Ireland has consistently condemned Hamas for its heinous
attacks in Israel on 7 October 2023. The taking of hostages is unconscionable.
However, Israel’s response has been and is completely disproportionate. We need an
immediate ceasefire and hostage release deal, followed by a massive surge of
humanitarian aid into Gaza. Instead, we are seeing an alarming escalation of the
conflict in the West Bank and now in Lebanon. The violence and killing must stop.
It has long been clear that the only viable basis for lasting peace and security
for Israelis and Palestinians is a two-State solution. The recent adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution ES-10/24 on the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice is a step in the right direction. The international community must
now act to implement it. Ireland supports the global initiative launched last week here
in New York to support the two-State solution, I encourage States to join in that shared
effort.
Russia’s unjustifiable war of aggression against Ukraine represents a severe
threat to the global multilateral system. A challenge to the norm that borders cannot
be changed by force should concern us all very deeply. We should all be deeply
concerned by defiance of the United Nations Charter by a permanent member of the
Security Council. Undermining the rules-based order, on which the security of each
of us depends, should concern us all. The transfer of ballistic missiles by Iran and
North Korea to Russia for use in Ukraine is totally unacceptable. Those transfers are
unlawful and threaten international peace and security, and they must stop.
That is not just a European security concern. This is a war with global impacts
on food security, energy and commodity prices. Too often, it is those least able to
respond who suffer the most. And it is a colonial war, about annexing the territory
and destroying the identity of a United Nations Member State. That is why Ireland is
committed to holding Russia accountable for its actions and to bringing about a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine. As the global community

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
33/6824-17724
reaffirmed at the first Summit on Peace in Ukraine, the United Nations Charter can
and must serve as a basis to achieve that peace.
It is shocking that Russia has threatened the use of nuclear weapons in that
conflict. The mere possession of nuclear weapons carries the risk of human and
environmental disaster. That is why Ireland will propose a draft resolution at this
session of the General Assembly to further our collective scientific understanding of
the dangers those weapons pose. I urge all countries to support that draft resolution.
We cannot allow a new nuclear arms race.
We must also act to prevent another arms race for weapons beyond human
control, and do so urgently, given the pace of technological development. Ireland
supports the Secretary-General’s call to conclude a treaty on autonomous weapons
systems by the end of 2026.
The Horn of Africa and the Sahel region are beset by multiple overlapping
crises, from food insecurity, drought and flooding to actual conflict. Addressing them
means working for sustainable development and human rights. The situation in the
Sudan is appalling — 12 million people forced from their homes; widespread reports
of abuses against civilians, particularly women and girls; 25 million face crisis levels
of hunger and are now facing famine. We need to see urgent action. We demand a
ceasefire, humanitarian access, the protection of civilians and accountability for
human rights abuses. We must do whatever it takes to pressure the parties to come
back to the negotiating table and bring to an end that destructive cycle of violence.
And we need to see accountability for those who have committed these atrocities.
As we witness those harrowing conflicts, we must not accept that situation. The
world as it is now is not the world as it should be. We have seen what can be achieved
by cooperation through the Organization. The fact that the international community
has managed to come together in a time of heightened tension to endorse that vision
and agree a way forward, a Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), shows us what can
be achieved. We continue to be united by our shared humanity. Ireland will work hard
with others during the General Assembly to follow through on our words with action.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Manuel José Gonçalves, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
the Republic of Mozambique.
Mr. Gonçalves (Mozambique) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by
the delegation): It is a great honour for me to address the Assembly and to convey to
all participants in this session a special greeting from Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi,
President of the Republic of Mozambique.
We congratulate Mr. Philemon Young on his election as President of the General
Assembly at the seventy-ninth session and wish him success in fulfilling his mandate.
We extend our greetings to the other members of the Bureau. We assure him of our
full support in carrying out his duties.
We also commend the positive work carried out by his predecessor, Ambassador
Dennis Francis, which contributed to the strengthening of our Organization towards
a more decisive approach to the peace and development agenda.
We extend a word of great appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres
for his tireless dedication and advocacy in promoting multilateralism for global peace
and security.
The current session of the General Assembly is a sovereign opportunity to
reinforce multilateralism and our collective action to consolidate international peace
and security for the well-being of humankind. Those renewed commitments were

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772434/68
reinforced by the deliberations of the Summit of the Future and other important high -
level events held recently. We therefore welcome the theme of our general debate,
which has particular relevance due to its connection with the future, which requires
urgent efforts to strengthen international cooperation so that, together, we can face
the challenges faced by humankind today and build a prosperous present and the
promising future for humankind.
We are aware that in just six years the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development will expire and that the progress made on its implementation remains
still tenuous. It is urgent to mobilize the resources necessary for its financing and for
other internationally agreed development objectives in order to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. We therefore encourage all Member States to
accelerate the materialization of the commitments made, including the reinforcement
of mutually beneficial cooperation in responding to prevailing challenges, including
the fight against poverty, conflict, terrorism and climate change.
We are optimistic about our collective future, where an environment of peace
and security reigns. The functioning of our global institutions must keep up with the
current dynamics imposed upon us. We therefore align ourselves with the voices
defending the urgent need to reform the United Nations, especially at the level of the
Security Council, so as to ensure greater inclusion, particularly giving a permanent
voice to the African continent, thereby correcting the historical injustice to which it
has been subject.
We are encouraged by the ongoing collaboration between the United Nations
and the African Union to overcome conflicts in the context of maintaining
international peace and security. Resolution 2719 (2023), adopted by the Security
Council on 21 December 2023, is a significant milestone for African Union-led peace
support operations. It strengthens collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union, promoting greater regional and national ownership of peace
initiatives. We hope that it will effectively ensure access to the adequate, predictable
and sustainable financing required for the operations of the African Union. We believe
that this collaboration will help to strengthen efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
towards a prosperous and peaceful Africa, the Africa we want, as established in the
Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
The concert of nations has been made feasible throughout these times by the
collective observance of the sacrosanct objectives and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the defence of the right to self-determination of peoples
and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We are deeply
concerned over the escalation of conflicts and tensions in various parts of the world.
In Ukraine, unfortunately, there are still no encouraging signs of an end to the
conflict. We believe that the safest path is dialogue between the parties. It is up to all
of us, as Members of the United Nations, to persuade the parties to the conflict to end
hostilities and opt for dialogue towards peace between those two countries.
In the Middle East, in violation of the principles of international law and
international humanitarian law, the conflict continues to claim civilian lives,
particularly those of children, women and the elderly, and to destroy civilian
infrastructure, causing the tragedy that we are regretfully witnessing. We call for a
cessation of hostilities and the protection of innocent civilians in the conflict. The
vision of the existence of two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, as full Members
of the United Nations is the fairest formula that will ensure sustainable peace and
stability in that region.
In Africa, we are also concerned about the conflict in the Sudan, which has killed
thousands of innocent civilians, including refugees, and caused an unprecedented

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
35/6824-17724
humanitarian disaster. We reiterate our call on the parties to the conflict to end
hostilities and the need for dialogue in order to restore peace and stability.
The use of sanctions and other unilateral coercive measures does not contribute
to the preservation of peace, security and sustainable economic and social
development. Unilateralism is contrary to the multilateralism enshrined in the
Charter. In that context, we reiterate our film call for the total lifting of the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Zimbabwe and Cuba, which have had significant
negative impacts on the populations of those countries and harmed their rights and
well-being, so as to allow for more fair and equitable development.
In January 2023, Mozambique began its two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, from 2023 to 2024. With three months remaining
until its end, we reiterate that it has been an honour and a privilege to serve on the
United Nations organ responsible for maintaining international peace and security.
Over the past two years, Mozambique has made its direct contribution to peace and
security in the world, collaborating in addressing all topics on the Security Council’s
agenda, amongst which we highlight peace and security in Africa, combating
terrorism, women and peace and security, and the nexus between climate, peace and
security. We presided over the Council in March 2023 and May 2024.
We have been chairing the ad hoc Working group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. We will soon end our mandate. We reaffirm our commitment to
continuing to collaborate with a view to pursuing the goals that guide the Security
Council in strengthening international peace and security. We therefore thank all
Member States for the support they have given to Mozambique during its mandate
and reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism and the principles and objectives set
out in the United Nations Charter, which have guided our mandate since the
beginning.
In Mozambique, we continue to consolidate our young democracy and
citizenship, strengthen dialogue and seek consensus in the various forums of
participatory representation. In that spirit, the seventh presidential and legislative
elections and those for the provincial assemblies will take place on 9 October. In the
fight against terrorism in the province of Cabo Delgado, our vigorous action against
that phenomenon has made progress, with the support of the Southern African
Development Community, Rwanda and international cooperation partners, despite the
prevailing challenges. In that regard, we reiterate our appreciation and gratitude to all
bilateral and multilateral partners that have spared no effort in supporting us in the
fight against terrorism and for the restoration of peace and tranquillity to the victim
populations and the reconstruction of economic and social infrastructure in areas
affected by terrorist activities. Furthermore, our country has faced multiple and
complex challenges, including exposure to risks associated with climate change, such
as cyclical cyclones, droughts and floods. Those phenomena cause economic losses
averaging around 1.1 per cent of our gross domestic product per year.
Finally, we reiterate the commitment of the Government of the Republic of
Mozambique to international peace and security, which are essential factors for the
well-being of humankind in this prosperous world.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Sheikh Shakhboot Nahyan Al Nahyan, Minister of State for the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of the United Arab Emirates.
Sheikh Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Dennis Francis for his outstanding leadership of the previous
session.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772436/68
I also congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the
General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, and I wish him success in that
endeavour.
From the rostrum of the General Assembly, a place that has always embraced
our ambitions and agonies, we call upon all to join hands and work together to create
a better world for our sons and daughters and for future generations — a better world
in which they can enjoy a decent, prosperous and stable life; a world in which all
political, diplomatic and economic capabilities and tools and the latest technological
and scientific advancements are harnessed to preserve life in all its forms.
In the United Arab Emirates, we have focused on that vision. We have unleashed
the wheel of progress in every field, from development, economy and education to
technology and industry. Since its inception, the United Arab Emirates has adopted a
transparent foreign policy based on credibility and building balanced relations with
all countries. That includes supporting regional and international efforts to achieve
stability and reduce escalations, encouraging dialogue and building bridges, as well
as resolving crises instead of merely managing them.
As our world stands at a dangerous crossroads, we must redirect the compass of
our international action to focus on a set of fundamental and non -negotiable
principles. Most importantly, we must stand united in the face of contentious issues,
support all peoples without applying double standards, ensure the protection of
civilians, uphold the rule of law, commit to human rights and respect the principles
of good neighbourliness.
Returning to those basic principles has become more urgent than ever,
particularly in the light of serious violations committed in conflicts raging in our
region and around the world. Those violations have deepened human suffering, erased
decades of progress and caused widespread displacement, creating massive refugee
crises. They have also increased the burdens on concerned and neighbouring
countries, particularly with the ongoing bloody war on the Gaza Strip, the wars in the
Sudan and Ukraine, and the crises taking place in Yemen, Syria, Libya, the Sahel,
Afghanistan, Myanmar, Haiti and other countries. It must be recalled here that even
wars have rules. Parties must respect international law, including international
humanitarian law.
In Gaza, an immediate and lasting ceasefire must be reached, the rapid, full and
unimpeded access of humanitarian aid at scale must be allowed, and the hostages and
detainees must be released. The relevant Security Council resolutions must also be
implemented. We must act wisely in response to the rapid developments threatening
our region. It is evident that everything we have warned of is now unfolding beyond
our control. We regret to see the war spread to Lebanon at a time when we were
hoping for an announcement about a deal to end the war on Gaza.
It is unacceptable to ignore the decisions and advisory opinions issued by the
highest judicial body of the United Nations, the International Court of Justice. That
includes the provisional measures issued by the Court regarding the war on Gaza. In
that context, we call for maintaining the security and safety of people. We must
safeguard regional and international stability, including the security of international
navigation, trade routes and energy supplies. That is especially crucial in the light of
the continued attempts of terrorist and extremist groups to exploit people’s suffering
for their own political goals.
In the Sudan, the warring parties must stop the fighting immediately and
permanently and allow unhindered and sustainable access to humanitarian assistance
across borders and conflict lines. We express our complete rejection of the continued
targeting by the warring parties of civilians and their obstruction of the delivery of

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
37/6824-17724
humanitarian aid. My country condemns in the strongest terms the blatant attack
launched by the Sudanese Armed Forces on the residence of the Ambassador of the
United Arab Emirates in Khartoum on 29 September, in flagrant violation of the
fundamental principle of the inviolability of diplomatic premises and of international
conventions and norms, particularly the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
We call on the warring parties to engage seriously in peace talks. In that regard,
we emphasize the importance of building on the positive outcomes achieved in the
meetings of the working group of the Aligned for Advancing Lifesaving and Peace in
Sudan Group. We commend all initiatives aimed at finding a comprehensive solution
to the crisis. We must all continue working with regional and international partners to
alleviate the suffering of the Sudanese people so as to ensure them a safer and more
prosperous life.
In Ukraine, the impacts of the ongoing war have transcended seas and
continents. It is therefore imperative to find a peaceful solution to end the conflict,
which has increased global polarization, created refugee and prisoner-related crises
and impacted global food security. Through our continued engagement with all
parties, my country has contributed to the release of nearly 2,000 prisoners of war
through mediation efforts between the Russian Federation and Ukraine. We continue
to push for dialogue and de-escalation and support recovery and reconstruction.
Speaking of resolving long-standing crises, we must reiterate here our full
support for Moroccan sovereignty over the Moroccan Sahara region, as well as for
the autonomy initiative to maintain the territorial integrity of the Kingdom of
Morocco.
In numerous crises, my country has refused to the international response to be
obstructed by growing global polarization or obstacles imposed by conflict parties.
To that end, my country has sought to overcome those challenges and used all
available means to enable humanitarian work to continue. To help all those in need
around the world, in line with our commitment to the legacy of Sheikh Zayed bin
Sultan Al Nahyan, the founder of the United Arab Emirates. Today, Sheikh
Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the United Arab Emirates, has
directed $100 million in urgent relief aid to support the brotherly people of Lebanon
in facing the current challenges.
When the war intensified in the Sudan, pushing millions of people into a
multidimensional humanitarian disaster, the United Arab Emirates devoted its efforts
to supporting the Sudanese people. We recently contributed $100 million to support
United Nations efforts to address the humanitarian repercussions of the war in the
Sudan and neighbouring countries. We have also established two field hospitals in
Chad to provide medical services to all those in need, including Sudanese refugees.
Similarly, we spare no effort in supporting the innocent people besieged in Gaza.
To that end, we have sent urgent aid by land, air and sea and provided treatment to
sick and injured Palestinians through the field hospital we established in Rafah and
the floating hospital in El-Arish. The United Arab Emirates also continues to help
evacuate the wounded and sick and their families from Gaza, most of whom are
children and cancer patients, to receive the necessary treatment in the United Arab
Emirates hospitals. We have also maintained our support for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which plays a vital role
in Gaza. We welcome its recent launch of preparatory programmes to resume its
educational services in the Strip. We applaud the humanitarian workers who provide
a ray of hope in the dark shadow of war for all their efforts.
If we want to bring an end to the vicious seven-decade cycle of the Palestinian
issue, we must take concrete steps towards the establishment of an independent

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772438/68
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the two -State solution.
We must also consider the establishment of a temporary international mission in the
Gaza Strip, upon an official request from the Palestinian Government, to address the
humanitarian crisis, re-establish security and law and reunite Gaza and the West Bank
under a reformed Palestinian Authority. That would enable the Palestinian Authority,
once reformed, to take firm steps towards reaching a comprehensive and just politica l
solution for the Palestinian issue.
My country believes that the State of Palestine, which only a couple of weeks
ago took its new seat in the Hall like any other nation, has fulfilled the requirements
for full membership of the Organization. It deserves to be recognized by all States as
a full-fledged State under occupation.
In parallel with our efforts on those issues, my country renews its demand on
Iran to end its occupation of the three United Arab Emirates islands of Greater Tunb,
Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa. Those islands are an integral part of the United Arab
Emirates. We will continue to urge Iran to respond to our repeated calls to resolve
that issue, either through direct negotiations or by resort to the International Court of
Justice.
With respect to all other issues, the United Arab Emirates believes that the best
way to resolve crises is through diplomacy. We cannot fight fire with fire. When
traditional approaches are no longer effective, it is our duty to update them so as to
move forward during the darkest moments of our history.
Building a secure and prosperous future requires renovating the mechanisms of
multilateral action to better address the serious challenges surrounding us and to play
important roles in finding solutions to conflicts and crises, particularly as the current
international system has failed in preventing the most serious crimes or holding its
perpetrators accountable. That will first require reform of the Security Council
through a comprehensive effort that includes all States Members of the United
Nations, which would allow the Council to restore its credibility, fulfil its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, and combat impunity, even in situations
where polarization and political considerations prevent it from taking action.
Developing and poor countries must also be at the centre of any international
effort. We must ensure that women and young people are empowered to play their
critical and meaningful roles in all aspects of collective action. While we are
preoccupied with addressing the current reality, we must not lose sight of the
importance of crisis prevention efforts. The deadliest wars in history did not break
out overnight; they were the result of extremism, hate speech and intolerance
accumulating over years, if not decades. That requires us to take concrete steps to
uphold the principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence and to coordinate regional
and international efforts to extinguish the sparks of conflict before they ignite.
Furthermore, collective action is the only way to address the challenges posing threats
to the future of humankind and our planet, including climate change.
The outcomes of the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28), hosted by the United
Arab Emirates, demonstrated what we can achieve when we work together. The
historic United Arab Emirates consensus adopted by 198 countries embodies a global
consensus on developing measures to prevent global warming above 1.5°C and to
operationalize the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage to compensate the
countries most affected by climate change. We will continue to cooperate with
everyone to support climate action and clean and renewable energy solutions,
including through the COP Presidencies Troika initiative with Azerbaijan and Brazil,

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
39/6824-17724
to provide a concrete response that contributes to the achievement of the objectives
of international climate agreements.
We will also pursue our efforts to address the issues of water scarcity and the
provision of sustainable clean water for all, including through the United Nations
Water Conference, which we intend to host in the United Arab Emirates in 2026, in
partnership with Senegal. Our other initiative in that field, most notably, is the
Mohamed bin Zayed Water Initiative, which was launched this year.
In that forward-looking spirit, my country seeks to explore the potential
opportunities provided by advanced technologies and to harness emerging
technologies, such as artificial intelligence, as essential tools to find innovative
solutions for our businesses, lives and Government services. We believe that
international attention and investments should be directed towards those technologies
in order to accelerate sustainable development and achieve transformative shifts in
addressing the challenges we face in different fields. That will allow us to bridge
development gaps and support progress for all.
Let us seize this opportunity to correct the course of joint international action,
our refuge in difficult times, and work together hand-in-hand to create a bright future
that future generations will be proud of.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Peter Mohan Maithree Pieris, Chairman of the delegation of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka felicitates Mr. Philemon Yang of Cameroon
on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy -ninth session.
Against the background of global turmoil, setbacks and transformations, the
aspirations of this year’s session of the Assembly to a better global future resonate
with those of the people of Sri Lanka. On 23 September, following a transparent and
peaceful electoral process and a dignified transition, in keeping with our decades of
democratic practice, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake was sworn in as the ninth
Executive President of Sri Lanka. The people of Sri Lanka have vested in him the
mandate to realize the people’s aspirations for the future and to build a sustainable
foundation for future generations. President Dissanayake has outlined to the nation
his determination to put in place a united Sri Lanka and a transformed ethical political
culture echoing the wishes of the people. His future trajectory combines nation -
building based on public trust in governance and in the political system through
accountability, integrity and the elimination of waste and corruption. In the words of
President Anura Kumara Dissanayake:
“We are launching … a unified Sri Lankan nation that respects
diversity, fully ending an era of division based on race, religion, caste and
class”.
In order to achieve those objectives, the Government has recognized that it is
crucial to reinforce stability and confidence in the economy and stimulate growth.
The Government will work within commitments to reach macroeconomic stability
through the framework of international financial institutions and in negotiations with
sovereign and private external stakeholders. The Government is acutely aware of the
hardships that have been faced by the people in the process of economic transition.
Measures will therefore be put in place to generate greater resources for enhanced
public expenditure and welfare to raise the living standards of our people, with equity
and justice. The recent vote for change by the people of Sri Lanka presents us with a
renewed opportunity, and we are determined to succeed including with the support of
our friends in the international community.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772440/68
Despite our consensus on the Pact of the Future (resolution 79/1), this year’s
session takes place at a moment of profound global crises on multiple fronts. In the
Middle East, we are closer to wider regional conflagration than when we convened
last week and the humanitarian suffering in Gaza gets worse by the day. The
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) now appears beyond our
reach, and we are off target on the Paris climate goal to limit the temperature increase
to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Big Power rivalries and geopolitical tensions
have reignited and widened, and new rifts are appearing on North -South lines.
Racism, intolerance, discrimination and xenophobia against migrants are on the rise.
Theatres of conflict and tension have opened up on land and in the oceans.
Developments in the digital realm provide fertile ground for the proliferation of
disinformation and hate speech, with the potential for violence.
The lingering impact of the pandemic has reverberated throughout the global
economy, creating profound economic insecurities, threatening free trade and leading
to protectionist barriers. We are spending more on weapons than ever before in the
past and, regrettably, the use of nuclear weapons is in mainstream discourse. New
domains are being weaponized including outer space and cyberspace, while the use
of artificial intelligence is challenging international humanitarian law on the
battlefield.
Today, a large number of developing countries, including my own, face a debt
crisis of unprecedented proportions. That debt distress severely impedes our ability
to invest in sustainable development, as we are unable to meet these financial
obligations while simultaneously investing in the future and well-being of our
citizens. It is a fact that financing challenges remain at the heart of the sustainable
development crisis. As per the Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2024,
the SDG financing gap is between $2.5 trillion to $4 trillion. Is that not staggering?
Given those immense challenges, the need for comprehensive reform of the
global financial architecture has never been more pressing. The current international
debt resolution framework has failed to respond adequately and efficiently to
contemporary challenges. The global landscape has changed dramatically, with global
debt, particularly in the developing world, increasingly controlled by international
bond markets and non-Paris Club lenders. Let us think about that. It is therefore time
that we review the architecture’s traditional moorings; we must urgently reform the
system to reflect the new economic landscape. It is therefore necessary, we say, to
find a more efficient, comprehensive and equitable way to address debt.
Other institutions of global governance that reflect the world of the past century
need to be reformed to meet the challenges of the present and the future. The
composition of the Security Council must be expanded to be representative of current
global diversity and decision-making. In parallel, the role of the General Assembly,
the most representative primary organ of the United Nations where all countries have
an equal voice, must be strengthened and revitalized.
Sri Lanka’s commitment to maintaining global peace and security has been
unwavering. We recognize that peacekeeping is one of the most effective tools
available to the United Nations to help Member States to manage the difficult phase
of transitioning from conflict to peace. Sri Lanka has been contributing to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in some of its most hostile and demanding
deployments. Over 23,000 men and women from the Sri Lanka’s armed forces and
police have contributed to ensuring international peace and security under the United
Nations banner over the past six decades and been commended for their high -calibre
service.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
41/6824-17724
Beyond economic recovery, we face an even greater existential threat — the
ongoing climate crisis and the accompanying need for a just energy transition.
Although our development trajectory has not contributed to climate degradation, Sri
Lanka has taken concrete steps to address those challenges. We will increase our
nation’s forest coverage and increase renewable energy in our energy mix. It is time
for developed countries to fulfil their obligations and assume their fair share of
responsibilities under the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. We
need their support in mitigation and adaptation efforts, as well as compensation for
loss and damage. Without a concerted international effort to bridge the climate
financing gap, the burden of climate impacts will continue to fall most heavily on
those least responsible for the crisis. Sri Lanka is committed to phasing out coal by
2040 and reaching net-zero carbon emission by 2050. As a climate-vulnerable
country, Sri Lanka has been advocating for the operationalization of the Fund for
responding to Loss and Damage and called for climate justice. There is therefore an
urgent need for increased climate financing, especially for vulnerable developing
nations like Sri Lanka.
Two other critical issues that are also relevant to Sri Lanka as an island nation
were a part of the discourse during this year’s high-level week. Sea level rise is an
imminent reality affecting millions. While Sri Lanka has taken mitigation measures
nationally, as included in the National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change, it is
through concerted international action that solutions can be implemented to halt the
global warming that is the cause of sea level rise. Sri Lanka initiated resolution
76/265, on declaring 1 March the World Sea Grass Day, to focus international
attention and awareness on a small but significant aspect of universal importance in
combatting climate change. Sri Lanka has further been recognized for its contribution
to mangrove regeneration programme as a 2024 World Restoration Flagship by the
United Nations, under the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration.
Anti-microbial resistance (AMR) has become a critical public health issue the
world over, with bacterial resistance linked to around 5 million deaths worldwide
annually. That is alarming. AMR, if not contained, has the potential to spiral into a
development issue as well, with life expectancies declining worldwide. We welcome
the target of mobilizing $100 million through the Antimicrobial Resistance Multi -
Partner Trust Fund to ensure that 60 per cent of countries have funded action plans
by 2030. However, international cooperation and sustainable financing must increase
to meet that goal.
As we seek solutions to global challenges, we must harness the power of
technology and innovation. Digital technologies and artificial intelligence offer
unprecedented opportunities to accelerate sustainable development. Sri Lanka aims
for sustained growth through innovation and envisages an equitable digital
transformation through the establishment of accessible digital public infrastructure.
At the same time, we call for increased capacity-building and technical assistance to
bridge the global digital divide and empower all countries to leverage those tools for
the betterment of their people.
The theme of the seventy-ninth session calls on us to leave no one behind and
to act together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human
dignity for present and future generations. In Sri Lanka, 38 per cent of our total
population is youth, which is the most capable and dynamic resource that can
contribute to our future development. Sri Lanka advocates for increased youth
participation in decision-making processes. After all, the Declaration on Future
Generations (resolution 79/1, annex II) is theirs. Simultaneously, the new Sri Lanka
will realize the aspirations of a just society, with greater empowerment for women,
who make up to 52 per cent of our population.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772442/68
As we look towards the future, we must also address one of the gravest injustices
that the Assembly has inherited from the past. Sri Lanka has repeatedly voiced its
concern over the dire humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We reiterate our support for the recognition of the legitimate and inalienable right of
the Palestine people to statehood and join the call for a two -State solution, based on
the 1967 borders, in line with all United Nations resolutions.
As a country that has suffered separatist terrorism for decades, we condemn the
terrorist attacks in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world. Sri Lanka calls for the
complete and unconditional lifting of all unilateral coercive measures imposed
against any country, as they hinder free trade and the right to development and have
unintended humanitarian consequences.
As an island country, we are concerned about the present environmental and
geopolitical aspects relating to the oceans. We want our oceans to be free of rivalry,
free of conflicts and free of pollution, and to be able to sustainably manage our marine
resources. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, with its cohesive
and universal nature, provides us with a say in shaping the global maritime system.
Sri Lanka remains committed to the balance and collaboration embedded within the
Treaty, enabling the freedom of navigation and sustainable use of the oceans, while
respecting the sovereignty of coastal States.
We must recognize that global challenges demand global solutions. In our
interconnected world, no country can solve those complex problems in isolation. We
must strengthen our international institutions, enhance knowledge -sharing and foster
stronger relationships. We must work together equitably, ensuring that all voices are
heard in shaping our shared future. It is encouraging that several developing countries
are on the cusp of becoming the leading economies tomorrow. We must bolster South -
South cooperation to foster economic growth, social progress and sustainable
development among us. However, we appreciate that South-South Cooperation is not
a substitute for the responsibilities of the global North, as set out in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
In conclusion, as Sri Lanka embarks on a path of national unity, ethical
governance and economic recovery and growth with justice and equity under new
leadership, we reiterate our commitment to multilateral cooperation in pursuit of
peace, prosperity and sustainability. We must harness the power of international
solidarity to confront the interconnected challenges before us, as well as to explore
durable solutions for the generations to come.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Song Kim, Chairman of the delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea) (spoke in Korean;
interpretation provided by the delegation) Allow me first of all to congratulate Mr.
Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy -
ninth session. I am confident that his able stewardship will lead this session to
excellent fruition.
The current session of the General Assembly is convened at a time when the
existence and development of humankind are faced with unprecedentedly serious
crises and challenges. Armed conflicts and bloodshed continue unabated in various
parts of the world, with the situation in Gaza still going on for almost a year, taking
the lives of tens of thousands of innocent civilians and creating the most appalling
humanitarian crisis since the Second World War. To make matters worse, ever-
deteriorating abnormal weather conditions, such as extreme high temperatures,
drought, torrential rain and flood, cause massive human and material losses, coupled

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
43/6824-17724
with such problems as the food and energy crises, unemployment and poverty and
social inequality.
In addition, confrontation, bloc-forming and unilateralism prevail over the spirit
of cooperation, unity and multilateralism that runs through the Charter of the United
Nations, creating obstacles to tackling international crises. Therefore, I expect that
the general debate, true to its theme and spirit, will serve as a significant occasion in
overcoming the challenges and crises threatening humankind’s existence and
development, defending the United Nations-centred multilateral system and
promoting peace and advancement of the present and future generations.
Mr. Niang (Senegal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
I consider it important for each and every United Nations Member State to fully
discharge its responsibility with a view to overcoming present crises and promoting
social progress and better standards of living, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations. From that perspective, I would like to outline the principled stand of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government and its efforts directed at
achieving socioeconomic development, defending regional peace and stability and
realizing international justice.
Today, the world is faced with challenges and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is no exception in that regard. However, valuable successes are being
recorded in the socioeconomic field, thanks to the correct line of the Government and
its steady implementation. First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government has made it a primary State policy to continue supplying children under
school age with dairy products and to provide schoolchildren with essential station ery
at the State’s expense. As a result of the strenuous execution of the policy, we have
witnessed continued improvement in the quality of childcare and education.
We have also achieved results in our efforts to achieve the sustainable
development of the national economy. The trend of growth continues in various fields,
such as light industry and agriculture, and remarkable successes are being registered
in promoting the welfare of the people, including efforts to provide all residents of
both urban and rural areas with new homes free of charge. In particular, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government recently adopted a policy for
regional development and is paying primary attention to its practical implementation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government’s regional
development policy is aimed at effecting an epoch-making enhancement in
socioeconomic, material and cultural standards at the national scale by bridging the
gap between the capital and provincial cities and between urban and rural areas and
developing all sectors and regions of the country in a balanced and simultaneous way
within a 10-year time frame. This will make an active contribution from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) towards achieving sustainable development for everyone
and ensuring that no one is left behind. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
regional development policy is firmly assured of its feasibili ty, as it is based on
scientific accuracy and justness. In 10 years’ time, the world will witness a completely
changed status of development in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The aforementioned work for socioeconomic development in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has never been undertaken in a peaceful and normal
security environment. A peaceful and stable external environment is very dear to us,
who aspire to overall development and the prosperity of the State, and yet the security
threat forced upon us from the outside is ever-increasing with the passage of time.
Last year, I stated from this rostrum that the situation on the Korean peninsula was
nearing the brink of nuclear conflict (see A/78/PV.14).

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772444/68
One year has passed since then. Now, the security landscape on the Korean
peninsula is quite different from that time and becoming much more acute. Since the
beginning of the year, the United States and its allies have staged joint military
exercises one after another under various code names, such as Freedom Shield,
Freedom Edge and joint air drills, in the vicinity of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, thereby heightening military tension and the hostile atmosphere in the
region. Much more serious is the fact that the anti-Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea nuclear war machine, the Nuclear Consultative Group engineered by the United
States and the Republic of Korea last year, is now in full operation and simulation
nuclear war drills are being conducted to put into practice an actual attempt to use
nuclear weapons against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Joining in are the States members of NATO, an outside force from beyond the
region and an exclusive military bloc. They are strengthening military cooperation
with the United States and the Republic of Korea, abusing the aegis of the United
Nations Command, which should have been dismantled decades ago pursuant to
resolution 3390 (XXX). They are stirring up military confrontation still further by
deploying warships and aircraft in the hot spot region of the Korean peninsula. That
being the case, they blame us for threatening them and the peace and stability of the
region and beyond with nuclear weapons.
Moreover, who developed and used nuclear weapons against humankind for the
first time in history? Who introduced nuclear weapons into the Korean peninsula in
the last century and poses a nuclear threat to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in this century? Who on Earth is talking unhesitatingly about the end of the
regime of a sovereign State and maintaining the first use of nuclear weapons against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as its national policy?
It is not the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ’s possession of nuclear
weapons that makes the United States hostile towards us. The truth is that the United
States’ hostility and nuclear threat to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for
over 70 years has compelled us to make a historic decision to possess nuclear
weapons. Our nuclear weapons have been manufactured and exist only to defend
ourselves. As such, any talk about the nuclear threat we pose only proves a conceived
hostility towards the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The security environment on the Korean peninsula is also bound to be intricately
complicated through the next generation unless the United States and its followers
change their confrontational and aggressive nature. In such circumstances, it is an
indispensable exercise of the sovereign right of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to maintain powerful strength capable of defending its national security
interests and guaranteeing peaceful development.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has not descended into war even though
it is fraught with extreme tension. That is totally attributable to our country’s powerful
war deterrence, which helps stave off the threat of aggression and maintain the
balance of power in the region. Therefore, we continue to increase our war deterrence
capabilities, not only out of our obligation to ensure national security but also because
of our mission to maintain peace and security in the region and beyond.
Comrade Kim Jong Un, President of the State Affairs of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, has said that we can choose either dialogue or confrontation, but
we should go further in getting ourselves fully prepared for confrontation. That is the
assessment and conclusion drawn from the 30-year Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-United States relations, he said. When it comes to the right to self -defence, a
legitimate right of a sovereign State, we will never go back to the far-off past. When
it comes to national prestige, we will never bargain over it with anyone, for it was

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
45/6824-17724
gained through the bloody struggle of the entire Korean people. Regardless of who
takes office in the United States, we will deal only with the State entity called the
United States, not its mere Administration. Likewise, any United States
Administration will have to face the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
is different from what the United States used to think.
It is the unvarying external policy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government to champion justice and peace, aspire to progress and development and
promote friendship and solidarity. That is also the idea running through the United
Nations Charter. From that viewpoint, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government stands strongly against attempts to divide the international political
arena into two camps through unlawful double standards, giving precedence to their
hegemonic interests and disturbing peace and stability.
At present, many factors are obstructing the attainment of the SDGs set by the
United Nations. The most critical among those are the high-handedness, arbitrariness
and double standards of the United States and certain United Nations Member States.
Since October last year, the indiscriminate massacre by the Israeli authorities has
claimed more than 40,000 Palestinian civilian lives in the Gaza Strip, including those
of many children and women, and thereby exposed a nation to complete extinction.
The United Nations exists to prevent the recurrence of the scourge of war that
has inflicted untold suffering on humankind. It is really shameful and deplorable that
such an act against humanity has persisted for a year. It is hardly imaginable that one
State can be immune to any censure and sanction even after committing such a
horrible massacre. That is entirely due to the patronage of the United States, a
permanent member of the Security Council. The United States has vetoed Security
Council resolutions on bringing peace to the Middle East on as many as five
occasions, overriding the wishes of the international community to see the ethnic
cleansing stopped by its ally. That is how the United States has discredited the
authority of the United Nations and incited crimes against humanity. That
notwithstanding, the United States is branding as a threat and a provocation the
legitimate exercise of the right to self-defence by a sovereign State that has done no
harm to anybody.
As for the Ukrainian situation, it has been prolonged for almost three years by
the United States and Western countries. They are blaming other countries even
though it is the result of the eastward expansion of NATO and the provision of lethal
equipment worth astronomical sums of money to their ally. The reason behind the
United States abusive invectives about the normal development of relations among
other countries is in fact to vindicate its unprincipled political and military support
for its ally and justify the forming of military alliances on a global scale. Justice or
injustice is judged according to whether the actor is pro -United States or an
independent country and the United Nations is misused for the political aims of an
individual country. That reality should no longer be tolerated or allowed.
I once again express serious concern and strongly denounce the fact that peace
and security in many parts of the world are seriously threatened and that the spirit of
the United Nations Charter is being debased by the arbitrariness and high -handedness
of a single, arrogant permanent member of the Security Council. I also offer deep
condolences to the Palestinian victims of the Israeli genocide and their bereaved
families and extend unwavering support and solidarity to the Syrian people in their
struggle to regain the occupied Golan Heights and safeguard the territorial integrity
of their country.
The reform of the present global governance regime should be oriented towards
realizing impartiality, equity and justice. The United Nations will restore its sacred

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772446/68
image only when it strictly adheres to the principles of sovereign equality, non -
interference in internal affairs, impartiality and objectivity and eliminates high -
handedness and arbitrariness, as well as biased double standard practices in all its
activities, in conformity with the purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter.
A just, peaceful and prosperous world remains the desire of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as ever. It is the consistent stand of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea Government to make positive, independent efforts against
imperialism as its immutable primary national policy to achieve international justice
based on respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and
mutual benefit and establish a new international order.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will, in the future too, cooperate
with all countries and nations that oppose and reject aggression, interference,
domination and subordination and aspire to independence and justice, transcending
differences in ideas and systems. We will also develop diversifi ed exchanges and
cooperation with the countries that respect our country and adopt a friendly attitude
to us.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Teburoro Tito, Chairman of the delegation of the Republic of Kiribati.
Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I am happy to greet the General Assembly on behalf of the
President, the Government and the people of the Republic of Kiribati.
At the outset, I wish to join other delegations in congratulating Mr. Philemon
Yang and the Government and the people of Cameroon on Mr. Yang’s election to
preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to assure him of
Kiribati’s full support and cooperation as he steers our work over the next 12 months.
We also acknowledge with gratitude the efforts and work of the outgoing
President, Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, as well as his leadership for
the past year.
It is with immense pride and a deep sense of responsibility that Kiribati stands
before the Assembly, marking 25 years of our membership of the United Nations. A
quarter-century ago, Kiribati joined this body and became the 186th Member of the
United Nations family, believing that the challenges we face as a small island nation
are inextricably linked to the fate of the global community. As we celebrate that
milestone, we honour the path we have walked with our global partners and reaffirm
our commitment to the core principles of the United Nations: peace, justice, human
rights, responsibility, respect and sustainable development.
The theme of “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future
generations” could not be more relevant as global conflicts escalates, causing
widespread destruction, displacing people and leaving millions neglected and
marginalized. The theme reminds us that, despite the ongoing crises, we must stand
firmly together as responsible leaders of the 193 Member nations of this greatest
multinational Organization and recommit ourselves to doing together whatever is
necessary to get the world back on the path of peace, progress and prosperity. What
we are witnessing in the world today and have witnessed for the past 79 years suggests
that the founding fathers’ aspiration to lasting peace is far from being realized. The
theme is therefore a timely reminder not to lose hope over the heartbreaking scenes
before us but to re-energize our unity, solidarity and collective determination to
overcome the forces that stand against the multilateralism that our United Nations
family embodies.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
47/6824-17724
That is why Kiribati reaffirms the critical importance of reinvigorating
multilateralism. The United Nations must remain the central platform for collective
global action, as no single nation can address the complexities of today’s challenges
on its own, be they pandemics, terrorism, conflict, human trafficking or climate
change, to name a few. It cannot be disputed that the United Nations, which was
created in 1945 by the 51 founding Members to restore and maintain world peace and
security out of the ashes and devastation of the Second World War, has now become
the largest international Organization on Earth dealing with all aspects of human
livelihood and well-being, to such an extent that its core function of maintaining
world peace and improving living standards has been greatly thwarted. That is further
exacerbated by the lack of unity and solidarity among Member States, coupled with
the persistent lack of respect for the Charter of the United Nations and for the rights
and sovereignty of nations under the Charter. The apparent lack of unity and solidarity
within the membership of this family is very much evident in the inability of Members
to stand united on issues of common concern, the increasing polarization of global
issues and the proliferation of exclusive groupings, which tends to breed more
disunity and distrust among Members.
The success or failure of the United Nations in its core mission to achieve peace,
progress and prosperity depends not only on the dedication, commitment and
persistence of its leadership and membership but also on the quality of the teamwork
between the two. The theme is a reminder of the need to gauge the performance of
the United Nations against its core mission of maintaining world peace, improving
living standards and promoting human rights and freedoms. In that vein, our
collective deliberations at the seventy-ninth session must shape a more effective path
for the United Nations, ensuring that it meets the pressing challenges of our time and
serves all nations equitably. Considering the significant disparity between the United
Nations intended mission and its actual outcomes, an in-depth analysis is needed to
explore why the Organization has not been successful in preventing and resolving
conflicts. It is important that the root causes of those failures be identified and
addressed.
Equally important is the need to stress the crucial role of the Secretary -General,
jointly with the five permanent members of the Security Council, in putting a stop to
ongoing conflicts and preventing new ones from erupting. In order to make the United
Nations fit to deal effectively with new and complex challenges confronting
humankind at this time, Kiribati calls for an overdue reform of the Security Council
to ensure that it reflects the realities of today’s world. We believe that the permanent
membership of the Council should be expanded to make it more inclusive and
representative, including by allocating seats to the small island developing States
(SIDS) and other vulnerable countries so as to ensure that the perspectives and needs
of the most vulnerable nations are heard and addressed.
My country firmly believes that Members’ respect for the United Nations
Charter and for each other’s rights and sovereignty is key to the peace of the world
and to the efficient and effective functioning of the United Nations multilateralism. It
is therefore of paramount importance that each one of us recommit ourselves now to
fully respecting the Charter and each other’s rights and sovereignty. Of equal
importance is a renewal of faith and trust in each other as Members of the United
Nations family.
Peacekeeping remains a cornerstone of international cooperation for
maintaining global security and stability. Kiribati is grateful to have contributed to
that effort by deploying police personnel to support the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan. Kiribati remains steadfast in its belief that global peace can be achieved
only through collective action and we will continue to play our part in that regard.

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772448/68
Kiribati firmly believes that a country without peace, as now seen in the case of
countries that are currently being devastated by wars and conflicts, cannot undertake
any meaningful development while its people are deprived of enjoying a normal way
of life and forced to live in refugee camps or as homeless people surviving through
charity and humanitarian donations. People living in such dire conditions have no
way of becoming economically productive in order to feel a sense of human pride and
dignity and cannot voluntarily free themselves from such a predicament until the
conflict has been resolved, peace has been restored, and life has returned to normal.
In other words, development and human dignity are not achievable without peace.
Peace must be achieved first.
Kiribati’s unwavering commitment to global peace internationals deeply rooted
in its tragic history with nuclear weapons. As a nation that has experienced the harsh,
destructive and long-lasting consequences of nuclear testing, Kiribati remains
steadfast in our support for the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, a
landmark agreement that represents a collective effort to eliminate the threat of
nuclear weapons from our world through complete nuclear disarmament, and we
stand in solidarity with other States in advocating for a world free of nuclear weapons.
Kiribati recently launched its first-ever foreign policy during its forty-fifth
National Day celebration on 12 July. That landmark document principally seeks to
enhance the policy objectives of the core pillars of the Kiribati 20 -Year Vision
(KV20). It captures the ways forward on how we seek to engage effectively and
strategically with our partners in areas of shared and mutual interest. It seeks to
develop our nation and people while protecting our right to self -determination over
our huge ocean and air space.
Allow me at this juncture to highlight Kiribati’s views and perspectives on some
pertinent issues for small islands, such as climate change and sea level rise, the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), marine conservation and protection, the Pact
for the Future (resolution 79/1) and the crucial link between peace, sustainable
development, human dignity and the concept of leaving no one behind, as highlighted
in the theme.
Kiribati’s designation as a least developed country (LDC) reflects not only our
economic challenges but also our acute vulnerability to climate change. Kiribati’s
geographical isolation from major world markets coupled with the volatility of global
commodity prices and the increasing frequency of extreme weather patterns,
exacerbates our development challenges. The high cost of imports, limited export
opportunities and reliance on fluctuating external markets further strain our efforts to
achieve sustainable growth and development. Our graduation status from the LDC
category, which has been deferred to a later date, remains at the back of our minds,
given what it would mean for us in the future, given those unprecedented challenges.
It is for that reason, among others, that we recognize the multidimensional
vulnerability index potential as a more fitting measure of vulnerability for all
developing States.
We believe that humankind must be well informed that the riches and resources
of the planet are finite and must not be overexploited to the extent that the planet’s
health and wealth are compromised, as is now evident in the climate crisis caused by
the overexploitation of the planet’s resources during the past century of
industrialization. While international dialogue on climate change has been extensive,
Kiribati urges that we move beyond words to concrete actions. The commitments
made in international forums, including the Conferences of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, must translate into tangible
results on the ground. As we continue to advocate for mitigation, it is clear that
adaptation and resilience-building are critical for low-lying atoll nations like Kiribati.

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
49/6824-17724
Coastal protection remains a priority for Kiribati, and while adaptative measures such
as the planting of mangroves and the demarcating of seagrass continue, there is a dire
need for interventions in hard infrastructure, such as resilient seawalls.
Climate change is undeniably the driving force behind sea level rise. Kiribati
continues to grapple with the challenges posed by sea level rise, which endangers our
land, agriculture and way of life. The Alliance of Small Island States Leaders
Declaration on Sea Level Rise and Statehood encourages our dedication to building
resilience against climate impacts and emphasizes the urgent need for global action.
The United Nations recognition of the profound impacts of climate change and sea
level rise, through the establishment of a high-level platform to address sea level rise
at this session, is a notable and welcome step. It reflects the urgency of addressing
climate change and its devastating consequences on vulnerable communities
worldwide. In line with our commitment to the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific
Continent, we strongly advocate for global climate action, including maintaining the
1.5°C goal and addressing sea level rise as essential to safeguarding the livelihoods,
identity, sovereignty and security of Pacific island communities, especially low-lying
atolls, which are only two or three metres above sea level.
As we continue our journey towards achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals by 2030, Kiribati has localized the SDGs in a 20-year development road map,
the KV20, with its primary aim of making Kiribati a healthy, wealthy and most
peaceful nation by 2036. That localization effort ensures that the SDGs are not merely
theoretical goals but are embedded in our national policies projects and initiatives.
Sustainable development is crucial to the long-term resilience and prosperity of
Kiribati and other small island developing States (SIDS). However, the realization of
those goals requires enhanced capacity development, technology transfer and stronger
data support systems to better meet the unique and special circumstances of
vulnerable countries.
Kiribati also commits and looks forward to the implementation of the Antigua
and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS), focusing on several key areas aimed at
promoting sustainable development and resilience and addressing the unique
challenges faced by small island developing States, such as climate change resilience,
sustainable economic development, access to financing and biodiversity
conservation, to name a few. ABAS reflects the need for tailored solutions that
recognize the unique circumstances of SIDS while promoting sustainable
development and resilience against external shocks.
Fisheries continue to hold prominence as a priority sector within our Kiribati
20-Year Vision, given that ocean resources contribute significantly to Kiribati’s
economy. Kiribati’s huge reliance on its tuna fishing licence revenue, which finances
about 70 per cent of the Government’s annual budget for expenditures, makes it
mandatory for the Government to take special care of the health of the marine
environment, as evidenced in its adoption of the marine spatial planning of the entire
3.5 million square kilometres of its tuna-rich ocean. In order to promote public
awareness and participation in marine protection and conservation, a number of
programmes have been launched in some villages and communities in which people
are encouraged to make village-based rules for protecting fisheries in their areas
against over exploitation and punishing offenders in accordance with well -accepted
cultural practices.
However, with our limited capacity in monitoring and surveilling our large
economic exclusive zone, we are highly susceptible to illegal, unreported and
unregulated (IUU) fishing expeditions. Considering our heavy reliance on our
fisheries for livelihood and revenue, Kiribati remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing challenge of IUU fishing, which undermines not only our national effort to

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772450/68
sustainably manage marine resources but also global progress towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. IUU fishing significantly impacts our national
economy by depleting fish stocks, undermining sustainable fishing practices and
reducing revenue for local fisheries. That threatens economic stability and the
livelihoods of our people dependent on fishing. We acknowledge the assistance of our
partners in addressing that gap and in providing surveillance support. Kiribati calls
upon the international community to strengthen cooperation and action to combat
IUU fishing, ensuring that sustainable fisheries management becomes a reality for all
nations, especially those most vulnerable to its impacts. Kiribati is acutely aware of
the profound significance of the ocean to our livelihoods, culture and environment.
That is why we have invested great effort in the preservation and protection of our
marine environment.
Kiribati applauds the Secretary-General for his great initiative in bringing the
whole world together to re-energize the United Nations as it approaches its eightieth
year anniversary so that it remains relevant and vital to the peace, progress and
prosperity of humankind in the future. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) offers
an essential road map for strengthening global cooperation on key issues, including
climate change, digital transformation and peacebuilding. We fully support the
development of the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I), which will
help bridge the digital divide and ensure that small island developing States like
Kiribati are not left behind in the digital age. It is vital that the international
community take bold steps to strengthen global governance mechanisms, fostering
inclusive multilateralism that benefits all countries, particularly the most vulnerable.
We believe that the successes of those initiatives will be key to achieving sustainable
development, peace and security for future generations.
I express our hope for the future. Kiribati firmly believes that, together, we can
unite in action and commitment, ensuring that no country is left behind in our pursuit
of a more sustainable world where peace, sustainable development and human dignity
are advanced for present and future generations. Let us make the seventy -ninth
session a time to renew our unity, solidarity and togetherness for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations.
We believe that, together, we can make it and that, together, we can do it.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siad Doualeh, Chairman of the delegation of the Republic of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by warmly
congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang, President of the General Assembly at its seventy -
ninth session, and assuring him of the full support of the Republic of Djibouti in the
execution of his mandate. The theme he has chosen for this session — “Unity in
diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity
for everyone, everywhere” — summarizes and reveals what millions of human beings
around the world are demanding: a less unequal, more united, peaceful and prosperous
world; a world where unity is not confused with the denial of particularities and where
the recognition of a common destiny mobilizes the energy of all to build a better
common future.
We reiterate our gratitude to his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for the
immense work he has accomplished.
The world is going through a perilous period, characterized by disorder and
uncertainty. The crisis is observable at several levels. Conflicts are proliferating and
becoming increasingly violent. The conflicts in Ukraine and Gaza continue to rage
while we are unable to agree conditions for the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement.
Terrorism is progressing in several parts of the world, including on the African

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
51/6824-17724
continent, where its metastasis is a source of concern for us. The annual financing gap
for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is widening dangerously every day
and many countries are facing a difficult financial situation, aggravated by the
multiplicity of exogenous shocks and the debt burden. The crisis of confidence among
Member States is affecting the multilateral system and undermining its credibility.
The risk of geoeconomic fragmentation and trade wars constitute a set of factors that
negatively impact global economic growth, generating chaos in which the interests
and voice of developing countries are lost.
We have already made the diagnosis in our discussions dating back to the
celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. We will therefore
not return to it. The question is whether we will be able to use the windows of
opportunity for renewal that are available to us, because, fortunately, there are a few.
We must redouble our efforts, overcome our divisions and take collective action to
end conflicts, put in place policies, investment programmes and partnerships to
mitigate the delay in the implementation of the SDGs, and reform international
financial institutions so that they can respond promptly and effectively to the
emergencies and systemic shocks that many countries around the world are facing.
Financial institutions must provide developing countries with access to a larger
volume of grants and financing on favourable terms, while preserving their risk
tolerance for investments linked to sustainable development, including the use of
innovative risk instruments. Those solutions must be discussed and deepened with a
view to their implementation within the Economic and Social Council, whose role
and place must be strengthened. The United Nations, as stipulated in the Charter, must
play an important role in the work of global economic coordination, as it is the most
democratic Organization. The Economic and Social Council must continue to play a
leading role in identifying emerging challenges, promoting innovation and achieving
economic, social and environmental integration of sustainable development.
We take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude to the States Members of
the United Nations for the confidence they have shown in my country, Djibouti, by
electing it in June as a member of the Economic and Social Council for the period
2025-2027. They can count on my delegation to defend those priority areas within the
Council throughout its mandate.
Like many developing States, Djibouti is facing major challenges induced by
climate change, including rising temperatures, the scarcity of water resources and
rising sea levels. In the face of those persistent threats, the Government of Djibouti
has implemented a series of ambitious and multidimensional measures aimed at
mitigating the effects of climate change and strengthening the country’s resilience.
The twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change offers another window of renewal for the international
community to prevent climate change commitments from falling behind schedule. It
will be a vital opportunity to prioritize adaptation and mobilize adequate resources.
The promise of $100 billion per year has not been met. There is an urgent need to
rebuild trust by rapidly disbursing the billions of dollars needed. We must make every
effort to implement the necessary adaptation measures and a fair transition to
renewable energy in low-income countries. There is an urgent need to operationalize
the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage in order to assist countries and people
suffering from the inevitable impacts of change and to mobilize more resources. That
is an issue that affects the rights of billions of people. It is an obstacle to development,
and it is also an existential threat.
(spoke in English)

A/79/PV.17 30/9/2024
24-1772452/68
We welcome the adoption of the Pact for the Future and its annexes, the Global
Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1). We live
in an era of disruptive technological advances and complex challenges. Djibouti is
grateful to the United States for having spearheaded the effort that led to the
unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 78/311, the first -ever
resolution on artificial intelligence, to promote safe, secure and trustworthy artificial
intelligence systems for sustainable development.
We in Djibouti are convinced that preparing for the future requires optimizing
our country’s human capital as the most sustainable key to economic growth. Like
many other African countries, Djibouti’s population is young. Its population is a
tremendous asset and a huge competitive advantage if it can be harnessed through
investment in skills development and new technologies to promote quality job and
workforce competitiveness. We have the ambition to vigorously pursue education
systems focused on accessing advanced technological skills.
(spoke in French)
Djibouti welcomes the progress made by Somalia in its efforts to stabilize the
country, as well as the holistic approach developed by the Government of President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to deepen peace. We welcome the efforts of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to develop a joint strategic assessment of the
situation in Somalia and a draft general concept of operations. We need to intensify
discussions to agree on the best financing option for the mission. The mandate given
to the mission that will succeed the African Union Transitional Mission in Somalia
mission is a robust one. The security threat posed by Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks is a
major obstacle to our joint efforts and must be eliminated as soon as possible. The
future mission must be guaranteed adequate resources and necessary equipment,
including force multipliers. We must fully support the efforts of the Somali
Government to reposition itself as a key player in the region. Its term on the Security
Council, which will begin next January, will certainly serve as a platform to share the
lessons it has learned and the experience it has gained during these decades of
conflict.
Djibouti remains concerned about the attacks perpetrated by the Houthis against
merchant ships and commercial vessels. They are disturbingly disrupting maritime
traffic and trade flows. The crisis has already caused an exponential increase in
maritime transport costs, which is reflected in the consumer goods price index. If the
situation continues, the impact on the Djiboutian economy, as well as the
environmental consequences of those repeated attacks, would be devastating. We call
for the identification of solutions that will ease the regional tensions contributing to
the deterioration of the situation in the Red Sea and for the intensification of
diplomatic efforts to find a favourable outcome to the peace process in Yemen, under
the auspices of the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
We are profoundly alarmed by the continued deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East and Gaza, and the West Bank in particular. The violence continues
unabated. We are profoundly saddened by the continued loss of lives, in particular
those of children in Gaza, the collective punishment of the Palestinian people, the
indiscriminate and continued bombings and the unlawful occupation in the form of a
total siege. The attack on Lebanon has accelerated the regional conflagration we all
feared. We express hope that the parties will agree to the 21-day ceasefire called for
by the United States and France. We must at all costs avoid an all-out war.
We welcome resolution ES-10/24, recently adopted by the General Assembly at
its tenth emergency special session by an overwhelming majority. The solution

30/9/2024 A/79/PV.17
53/6824-17724
demanded by the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Arab Peace Initiative
and all the 140 States that already recognize the State of Palestine is the two -State
solution. It is the only solution that can lead to lasting peace and security, and it is the
very solution that has been blocked by Israel’s defiant insistence on maintaining its
occupation of Palestinian territory in perpetuity.
We are troubled by the continued deterioration of the situation in the Sudan, the
third-largest African country and a founding member of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). We are saddened by the tragic loss of lives, the
destruction of infrastructure and the devastating humanitarian catastrophe that it has
caused. Djibouti, under the leadership of President Guelleh, current Chairman of
IGAD, has held many meetings at summit level to explore avenues for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
Djibouti reaffirms its commitment to the territorial integrity, sovereignty,
political independence and unity of the Sudan. In line with African Union Peace and
Security Council decisions, we underscore the importance of ensuring the protection
of the Sudanese State, its institutions and its people. We recently held in Djibouti, in
partnership with the United Nations, a retreat of mediators with the ultimate goal of
harmonizing the various initiatives aimed at ending the conflict. We call on the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces to honour the commitments
made in Jeddah and subsequent negotiations and further urge them to guarantee full,
safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access. We call on Sudanese leaders to have
the Sudanese people’s best interest at heart. We call on external actors concerned by
the conflict in the Sudan and in a position to do so to use their influence and bring
constructive pressure to bear on the parties so that they commit to a mediation format,
with the ultimate objective of achieving a negotiated settlement of the conflict. We
need to act with determination and in unison. We cannot and we must not give up on
the prospects of peace in the Sudan.
Djibouti stands ready to complete the normalization process wi

[pnpm archive: text truncated at 200 KB; 204710 of 263012 bytes of extracted text kept]
