First, I would like to welcome my brother, Mr. Hakan Fidan, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the brotherly Republic of Türkiye.
This visit, of course, comes within the framework of the ongoing coordination between us regarding regional and international issues, particularly the recent developments in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, Syria, and Lebanon. We hope that our discussions today yield practical steps towards enhancing security and stability in the region. We had a meeting in Antalya on the sidelines of the Antalya Diplomacy Forum for the Arab-Islamic Committee concerned with the affairs of the war on Gaza.
In our meeting today, we discussed the outcomes of the previous meeting and how coordination can continue between the two countries and partners in the region to find a solution to end this war and lift the siege on our brothers in the Gaza Strip.
We also welcome the steps taken by the new Syria in restructuring the Syrian state and enhancing consensus and unity among all Syrian parties, paving the way for the consolidation of civil peace, security and stability and building the state of law.
The State of Qatar is continuously communicating and coordinating with all sisterly and friendly nations to support efforts aimed at achieving peace in Syria and to assist in the reconstruction of the sisterly nation in accordance with the interests of the Syrian people and in fulfillment of their aspirations.
We also addressed the issue of sanctions imposed on the sisterly Syrian Arab Republic, and we believe that time has come to lift these sanctions in order to facilitate matters for our brothers in Syria.
Additionally, the primary focus of our discussions today was on the ongoing war in the Gaza Strip and the escalating actions of Israeli occupation forces in the West Bank and occupied Jerusalem.
We expressed our deep concern regarding the collapse of the ceasefire in Gaza and the resumption of Israel's aggression against the population, which has resulted in further casualties, additional destruction, and exacerbated the suffering of over two million Palestinians who are besieged by death through hunger, thirst, and the brutality of the Israeli machinery of destruction and killing.
We also emphasized the necessity of mobilizing regional and international efforts to enforce the immediate return of the parties to implement the stalled phases of the Ceasefire Deal, which came into effect on January 19, mediated by the State of Qatar, the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt, and the United States of America.
Despite the obstacles amounting to political extortion, we continue to work with partners in Egypt and the United States to advance towards the second phase of the Deal with the aim of its full implementation, including the release of all hostages, the permanent cessation of hostilities, and the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces. We cannot accept the starvation of the brotherly Palestinian people, nor can we allow the use of humanitarian and relief aid as a weapon in this conflict.
We must all work collectively with our allies in the international community to exert genuine pressure on Israel to compel it to open the borders for the entry of essential humanitarian aid, including medicine, food, water, and fuel.
We affirm that the State of Qatar will continue its efforts in collaboration with its partners to bring an end to this war. All attempts to tarnish the reputation of mediators, target them, or use them as scapegoats to evade political failure will not deter us.
Since the very first day of mediation efforts, we have worked tirelessly to bridge the gap between the parties and have strived to bring an end to this bloody conflict. However, our approach has been met with a torrent of misinformation aimed at tarnishing the reputation of our nation and undermining mediation efforts by a government that ought to prioritize the welfare and interests of its citizens, particularly the hostages.
Our stance has always been aligned with the camp of peace, and we are not among those who exploit and politically benefit from fueling crises and prolonging wars. Our people around the world are known for their values, tolerance, and openness to all cultures. Therefore, we will never be a party to spreading any form of hate speech or anti-Semitism, as alleged and as some attempt to promote for reasons that have become evident to everyone.
Qatar is a nation which is transparent in its relations and dealings, and it takes pride in its institutions and partnerships. Conclusive evidence has repeatedly proven the falsity of the persistent allegations against us. In this context, we reaffirm that such reprehensible behavior, characterized by bullying, political blackmail, and the dissemination of misinformation, will never deter us from continuing our efforts to achieve security and peace in our region and to safeguard the lives of our brothers.
We also addressed today in a meeting the latest developments concerning the Iranian nuclear file. We were briefed on the updates regarding these negotiations and welcome the efforts undertaken by the brotherly Sultanate of Oman to mediate between the United States and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Your Excellency, the Minister, for your presence in Doha. We highly appreciate this coordination, as the collaboration between the two countries continues across all files. We also value the constructive positions adopted by the sisterly Republic of Türkiye in contributing to the promotion of international peace and security.
Thank you.
