Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9520
Security Council
Seventy-eighth year
9520th meeting
Friday, 22 December 2023, 11.30 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. De La Gasca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)
Members: Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hoxha
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. França Danese
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dai Bing
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Agyeman
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamazaki
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fernandes
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Nusseibeh
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
23-42031 (E)
*2342031*

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
2/19 23-42031
The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt and
Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in the
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/1029, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Arab Emirates.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Last
week, a group of Security Council members travelled to
the Rafah border. We saw first-hand the dire challenges
that we have been discussing in this Chamber for more
than two months now, and we met victims who endured
and survived the hell unleashed on Gaza following
the 7 October attacks on Israel. I will never forget
meeting Mohammed, a boy who is almost the same
age as my son, Laith. Like countless other children, he
was recovering at the Al-Arish hospital from wounds
caused by an Israeli air strike. He told me that he just
wanted to go home and see his parents, and it was
heartbreaking to hear from hospital staff that he had
no idea that the strike that had wounded him had also
killed every single member of his family.
The situation Council members saw at the Rafah
border is unbearable. Thousands of trucks trying, and
failing, to enter through a choke point, a crossing that
was only ever intended to be for pedestrians. Nearly
1 million people are crammed into an area at the Rafah
border in Gaza where, before the war, there were less
than 300,000. According to the World Food Programme,
the food that has entered Gaza since the beginning of
the conflict is only 10 per cent of what is necessary to
sustain the population. Half of the people of Gaza are
now starving. The United Nations has reported that the
proportion of people going hungry in Gaza is higher
than in any country in any conflict in the past 20 years.
Given the desperate situation I have just described,
which is being detailed by the Secretary-General to
all United Nations agencies, things cannot possibly get
any worse.
Let us be clear: in the coming period, unless we
take drastic action, there will be famine in Gaza. This
war and the unbearable price being paid by Palestinian
civilians, 70 per cent of whom we know are women
and children, is also having a significant impact on
neighbouring countries. Regional spillover is a real
possibility. We are seeing it already, including in the
West Bank, where almost 300 Palestinians, including
75 children, have been killed. Egypt’s efforts to mitigate
the crisis on its border are admirable, but it needs help.
It is not Egypt’s problem alone. There must be an
international response, and that is why the Council has
been asked to urgently step in.
The text (S/2023/1029) is the product of extensive
consultations and engagement among members of the
Council and concerned parties, in particular Egypt and
Palestine, for whose efforts we are especially grateful.
The purpose of the text is very simple. It responds,
with action, to the dire humanitarian situation on the
ground for the Palestinian people bearing the brunt
of this conflict, while protecting those who are trying
to deliver life-saving aid, and it demands the urgent
release of the hostages and for humanitarian access
to address their medical needs. The draft resolution
reaffirms that we are building on the important
resolution 2712 (2023) and its provisions. It demands
that the parties to the conflict allow and facilitate the
use of all available routes to the Gaza Strip for the
provision of humanitarian assistance. What that means
is that all possible land, sea and air routes into Gaza
must be utilized to allow life-saving aid to enter. That
includes ensuring that the Kerem Shalom/Kerem Abu
Salem crossing remains open in full, with the Council’s
backing. But even if trucks are going in at scale, if
deconfliction does not happen, aid simply cannot reach
those who need it. Current deconfliction efforts are

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 3/19
clearly not working if 136 United Nations workers have
lost their lives because of the conflict.
That is why the text reaffirms that United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, premises and
consignments are protected and must not be attacked — a
vital principle of international humanitarian law that
has been repeatedly violated in this conflict. The
text also calls for urgent steps to allow unhindered
and critically expanded humanitarian access, and it
also calls on the parties to create the conditions for a
sustainable cessation of hostilities. We know that it is
not a perfect text. We know that only a ceasefire will
end the suffering, and that is why the United Arab
Emirates put a draft resolution (S/2023/970) to a vote
in the Council on Friday, 8 December (see S/PV.9498).
Unfortunately, it failed to be adopted. On 12 December,
153 countries called for this in the General Assembly.
Again, a ceasefire did not happen as a result of that call,
although its significance in its moral clarity is clear.
The draft resolution that the United Arab Emirates
has put in blue this morning responds to the calls for
a sustainable cessation of hostilities and a massive
scale-up of humanitarian aid. Often, in diplomacy, the
challenge is meeting the moment in the world we live
in, not in the world that we want, and we will never tire
of pushing for a full humanitarian ceasefire. The draft
resolution tasks the Secretary-General with appointing
a senior humanitarian and reconstruction coordinator.
Their mandate will be to monitor, verify and facilitate
humanitarian relief to Gaza, and the draft resolution
gives them the necessary resources and equipment to
do so. The coordinator will establish a mechanism for
accelerating the delivery of aid, and we expect the initial
report on its work within 20 days. We have established
similar mechanisms in other humanitarian crises. We
have been watching scenes on our screens in recent
weeks of civilians desperately scrambling in Gaza over
basic necessities to live. That should be an alarm bell
indicating a breakdown of civil order in Gaza. Not only
is it morally abhorrent, but it is not in anyone’s interest
and could spiral unless we address it head on.
Many Governments, including those represented at
this table, have made tremendous efforts to provide aid,
funds and advanced negotiations regarding hostages,
but until we pool efforts for an international response,
we will not be able to manage the crisis sustainably. If
the current situation continues, over the next few days,
while we are safe at home with our loved ones during
the festive period, civilians in Gaza will be dying either
from military strikes or the secondary impacts of war,
hunger, disease and widespread infection. The Council
has a responsibility to ensure that they are not victimized
twice over. We have extensively negotiated and tried
to find language that meets everyone’s concerns, but
also addresses the challenge with a practical response.
I would like to thank each and every Council member
who has contributed to, and improved, the text, and I
would like to thank the United States for its complete
engagement in trying to find a draft resolution that
meets the moment. Let us not reject this draft resolution
when the needs of the people are so great. If we do, it
will be an additional responsibility that the Council and
the Palestinian people will have to bear.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the past few days, the Security Council, and
with it the entire world, has witnessed the latest — and
I am not afraid to use these words — shameful, cynical
and irresponsible conduct by the United States, which
is trying to avoid responsibility for the further use of
the veto, resorting to all sorts of means of sabotaging
the Council’s adoption of a decision on Gaza.
This entire time, the world’s media and the public
have been wondering why the vote is constantly being
delayed on the United Arab Emirates’ proposed draft
resolution, which was already put into blue. The answer
is very simple: the United States, under various pretexts,
has been dragging out the negotiating process, deviating
from the normal transparent negotiating work. Instead,
it has resorted to its favoured tactic of gross pressure,
blackmail and twisting arms so that, at the last minute,
it will be able to present the members of the Council
with an ultimatum: either the Council adopts a text that
is convenient for Washington, or the United States will
once again block the adoption of any product.
The draft resolution that is now being put to a
vote (S/2023/1029) was initially, in our view, entirely
toothless. But, respecting the initiative of our Arab
colleagues and their needs, we were ready to support it.
Under pressure from the United States, which essentially
intercepted the authorship and usurped work on the text
behind the scenes at various levels, twisting the hands
of those in the region, with each new drafting, the text
lost more and more important provisions. Ultimately,
the wording that is being put to a vote today has been
extremely neutered, including its paragraph 4, on the
mechanism that would be supposed to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Gaza and ensure
its monitoring. But worse than all of that, through the

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
4/19 23-42031
efforts of the American delegation, the draft resolution
has included an extremely dangerous element for the
future of Gaza. Instead of the wording on an immediate
cessation of violence in paragraph 2, an ambiguous
phrase has appeared, calling for the parties to create
conditions for a cessation of hostilities.
The destruction, displacement or exile of the
population of Gaza in a cynical reading — and that is
precisely how it is going to be read in Israel — would
also create the conditions for a cessation of hostilities.
By signing off on that, the Council would in effect
be giving the Israeli armed forces complete freedom
of movement for further clearing of the Gaza Strip,
and anyone who votes in favour of the text as it is
currently worded would bear responsibility for that,
essentially becoming complicit in the destruction of
Gaza. Moreover, the reference in the text of the draft
resolution to condemning all indiscriminate attacks on
civilians has been removed. What signal will that send
to the international community? It is that the Security
Council is giving Israel a green light for war crimes.
I would like to put a question to members of
the Security Council. Why do we gather here in
the Chamber? Is it to rubber-stamp a decision that
is convenient for Washington, or it is to fulfil our
mandate to maintain international peace and security?
We still believe that we are here for the latter. In
order to give the Council a chance to save face and to
preserve its reputation, which has been rather shaken
in recent days, we propose to revert to the wording on
the cessation of violence contained in the initial draft
in blue. The Russian Federation proposes the following
oral amendment to paragraph 2.
Instead of the wording
(spoke in English)
“and in this regard, calls for urgent steps to
immediately allow safe, unhindered and expanded
humanitarian access and to create the conditions
for a sustainable cessation of hostilities”,
(spoke in Russian)
we should add the wording
(spoke in English)
“and in this regard, calls for an urgent suspension
of hostilities to allow safe and unhindered
humanitarian access and for urgent steps towards a
sustainable cessation of hostilities”.
(spoke in Russian)
That wording was in the text of the draft resolution
that had been put into the blue by the authors and was
awaiting a vote. Of course, it is not ideal. All Council
members are well aware that from the very beginning
Russia has consistently defended the need for an
immediate ceasefire. The General Assembly recently
called on the parties to do the same in its resolution
ES-10/22. However, we are proposing wording that
at the moment is the lowest common denominator for
nearly all members of the Council. Let the vote on
this amendment be a moment of truth to show which
members of the Security Council want to end violence
in Gaza and save civilian lives and which are guided by
opportunistic considerations.
The way that the text of paragraph 2 is currently
worded is the main thing that the United States
needs from this resolution. Under the cunning phrase
containing the words “creating the conditions for a
cessation of hostilities”, Israel would be given free reign
for further, non-time-limited, entirely unrestrained,
indiscriminate bombings of civilian infrastructure and
the civilian population of Gaza. We urge delegations to
vote in favour of the language we have just proposed to
paragraph 2 on ending violence, as initially proposed
by the delegation of the United Arab Emirates.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members of the
Council have before them a proposed oral amendment,
submitted by the Russian Federation, to the text of the
draft resolution contained in document S/2023/1029.
Rule 36 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure states, inter alia, the following:
“when an amendment adds to or deletes from the
text of a motion or draft resolution, that amendment
shall be voted on first.”
Accordingly, I intend to put the proposed oral
amendment to the vote first.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Malta, Mozambique, Russian Federation, United
Arab Emirates
Against:
United States of America

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 5/19
Abstaining:
Albania, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The President (spoke in Spanish): The proposed
oral amendment received 10 votes in favour, 1 against
and 4 abstentions. The proposed oral amendment has
not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States
of America): I am not going to respond Russia’s
rant — a country that has also created conditions that
it is complaining about now in its unprovoked war in
Ukraine. As colleagues can see, the United States did
not support the oral amendment put forward by Russia.
We believe that the humanitarian draft resolution before
us (S/2023/1029) calls for urgent steps to immediately
allow safe, unhindered and expanded humanitarian
access and to create the conditions for a sustainable
cessation of hostilities. This is a strong step forward,
and we believe that the Security Council should speak
out though the draft resolution that has been put before
us and move forward with a vote on it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Russian Federation, United States of America
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2720 (2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): This was tough, but we got there. Since the
start of this conflict, the United States has done work
tirelessly to alleviate this humanitarian crisis, to get
life-saving assistance into Gaza and to get hostages out
of Gaza, to push for the protection of innocent civilians
and humanitarian workers and to work towards a
lasting peace. Today’s vote bolsters those efforts and
lends support to our direct diplomacy. I want to thank
the United Arab Emirates and others for working with
us in good faith to craft a strong humanitarian-focused
resolution. It took many days and many long nights of
negotiating to get this right. But today the Security
Council provided a glimmer of hope among a sea of
unimaginable suffering. Today the Council called for
urgent steps to immediately allow safe, unhindered
and expanded humanitarian access and to create the
conditions for a sustainable cessation of hostilities.
I will note that this is the first time the Council has
used that language — language we believe is critical to
scaling up aid and underscoring the tough steps ahead
as we work together to achieve a lasting peace.
Today the Council has made clear that addressing
the humanitarian crisis in Gaza needs to remain at the
forefront of our agenda. Today the Council has made
clear that all hostages must be released immediately
and unconditionally and that humanitarian groups
must be able to access hostages, including for medical
visits. Today the Council has made clear that all parties
must respect international humanitarian law. Today the
Council has made clear that civilian and humanitarian
facilities, including hospitals, medical facilities,
schools, places of worship and United Nations facilities,
as well as humanitarian personnel and medical
personnel, must be protected. That applies to all parties
to this conflict, to Israel but also to Hamas, a terror
group that instigated this conflict and that wages war
from inside homes, hospitals and United Nations sites
and uses innocent civilians as human shields, an act of
cowardice and cruelty.
Today the Council made clear the need to ensure
that humanitarian personnel and assistance — including
fuel, food, medical supplies and emergency shelter
assistance — can reach people in need. It is hard to
overstate how urgent that is. Just yesterday, humanitarian
groups released a report on the dire food security crisis
in Gaza. And the word famine has started to enter the
vocabulary of humanitarian leaders I have met with.
Surgeries are being performed without anaesthesia.
People are huddled in overcrowded United Nations
shelters; others are sleeping in the streets. This

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
6/19 23-42031
resolution speaks to the severity of this crisis, and it
calls on us all to do more.
For our part, the United States has worked
tirelessly to scale up the delivery of humanitarian aid
through direct, persistent presidential diplomacy. In
the beginning of this conflict, we helped secure an
agreement to open the Rafah crossing. Last month, we
helped secure a deal that led to an extended humanitarian
pause, during which more than 100 hostages were
released and additional aid got into Gaza. And last
week, we helped secure the opening of the crossing
at Kerem Shalom for direct delivery of assistance to
civilians in Gaza. This resolution puts the weight of
the Security Council behind those efforts and bolsters
them by calling for the appointment of a senior United
Nations official who will work to expedite the delivery
of humanitarian aid at scale and in a sustained way.
We know humanitarians are already doing the
impossible, and we are there to do everything in our
power to support their life-saving work. It is vital
that, when implementing this resolution, the United
Nations builds on the progress we have seen on the
ground. And we look forward to this new official
working with humanitarian actors and relevant parties,
including Israel.
We know much more needs to be done to address
this humanitarian crisis and to lay the groundwork for a
lasting peace. And let us be clear: Hamas has no interest
in a lasting peace. Hamas is determined to repeat the
horrors of 7 October over and over and over again, and
that is why the United States supports Israel’s right to
protect its people from acts of terror. And I will note
that the resolution does not support any steps that would
leave Hamas in power, which in turn would undermine
the prospects for a two-State solution where Gaza and
the West Bank are reunited under a single governance
structure, under a revamped and revitalized Palestinian
Authority. We must work towards a future where
Israelis and Palestinians live side by side in peace. That
is the only way forward.
Ultimately, while we are encouraged that the
Council spoke out on this humanitarian crisis, we are
deeply disappointed — appalled actually — that once
again the Council was not able to condemn Hamas’s
horrific terrorist attack on 7 October. I cannot
understand why some Council members are standing
in the way and why they refuse to condemn these evils
unequivocally. Why is it so hard to condemn Hamas
for slaughtering young people at a concert, for burning
families alive and for the reports of widespread sexual
violence? I will never understand why some Council
members have remained silent in the face of such evil.
But we also believe the Council must continue to put its
support behind the resumption of humanitarian pauses.
Israel has made clear that it is committed to reaching
another agreement. This is now entirely up to Hamas.
Hamas must agree to additional pauses. That is how we
can get additional aid in, save lives and get additional
hostages out immediately.
Today the Council spoke out, but we know that
only progress on the ground can turn these words into
action. The United States will continue to work with
the United Nations, humanitarian groups and countries
in the region to get more humanitarian aid into Gaza,
to secure the release of hostages and to work towards
a lasting peace. There is no time to waste. We must
find a path forward to end the misery we are seeing.
It is unbearable to see a Palestinian child shivering in
fear after their home was destroyed. It is unbearable to
see the families of hostages experience such pain and
grief as they frantically await and pray for their loved
ones to return. My heart is filled with pain, and I know
the same is true for many people around the world.
We must work together to alleviate this tremendous
suffering once and for all.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2720 (2023) to get more aid into Gaza. As my Foreign
Secretary has said, it is heartbreaking to see children
in the rubble of their destroyed homes, not knowing
where to find food or water, not knowing where their
parents are. It is also heartbreaking to hear the stories
of families who still do not know the whereabouts of
their loved ones who were brutally taken on 7 October.
And it is heart-wrenching to know that aid is piling up
outside Gaza but not getting to the people that need it
when we hear daily warnings that people are starving,
disease is spreading and basic health care is lacking.
The United Kingdom is doing everything we can to
get more aid in. We have tripled United Kingdom aid to
the region. We were the first country to call on Israel to
open more crossings. The United Kingdom has experts
on the ground providing logistical support at Al-Arish,
in Egypt. And today we supported this resolution, which
will streamline aid checks so we can massively scale up
the humanitarian response. It demands the immediate

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 7/19
and unconditional release of hostages, and it calls for
steps towards a sustainable cessation of hostilities.
For the avoidance of doubt, we are clear that
the resolution is without prejudice to the rights
and obligations of the parties under international
humanitarian law. The adoption is an important signal
of the Security Council’s commitment. Our actions
today, and in the future, must help ensure that the horror
of 7 October never happens again. We unequivocally
condemn Hamas’s acts of terror and support Israel’s
right to self-defence. My Prime Minister and Foreign
Secretary have been loud and clear in their calls for
a sustainable ceasefire, as soon as possible. But a
ceasefire will not last if Hamas is still able to operate
in tunnels and to launch rocket attacks.
Our commitment to Israel’s security is firm, as
Israel deals with the threat from Hamas. Ultimately,
we support a two-State solution that guarantees true
security and stability for both Israeli and Palestinian
people. We also thank the United Arab Emirates for
their leadership on this resolution. Just this week, my
Foreign Secretary and the Minister for the Middle East
travelled to Jordan and Egypt to make sure that we are
supporting every effort to get aid in faster, and we will
keep working with all partners to deliver a humanitarian
response that meets the huge level of need.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
today’s adoption of resolution 2720 (2023). We thank
the United Arab Emirates for tirelessly conducting and
facilitating the negotiations and also for organizing the
trip to Rafah, which made possible a first-hand account
of the challenging humanitarian work being carried out
in the region.
This terrible crisis tests our humanity daily. The
time for a humanitarian response to the suffering
of civilians in Gaza is now — not tomorrow and not
when this conflict finally ends. After more than 70
days of hostilities, the situation in Gaza is dire. The
remaining hostages must be released immediately.
Civilians and civilian facilities must be protected.
That is not just a moral or ethical choice, it is an
obligation under international humanitarian law, as is
humanitarian access.
The amount of aid allowed into Gaza must be
substantially increased to meet the needs of the people
who depend on it throughout Gaza and should contain
all essential items, including fuel. Egypt’s efforts
to facilitate the use of the Rafah crossing by United
Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing
partners has been crucial. We welcome the recent
announcement by Israel of the opening of the Kerem
Shalom crossing for the direct delivery of humanitarian
aid to Gaza.
Brazil calls for the full implementation of the
adopted resolutions. Today’s resolution provides for
a monitoring mechanism for the United Nations to
inspect the delivery of aid. The United Nations must
be provided with the necessary means to carry out that
task. The aim is to increase and expedite the entry and
delivery of much-needed international assistance. The
Council must remain seized of the matter for as long as
it takes.
Since this is probably our last formal meeting
during our current mandate, I would like to thank all
members of the Council for the trust and cooperation
extended to our delegation during these two years. I
speak on behalf of my entire delegation and my capital
in expressing how much we have appreciated working
with all Council members at different levels and on
a vast array of very important topics on the United
Nations peace and security agenda. We end our term
with a sense of accomplishment of the priorities that
Brazil always sets when discharging its duties at the
United Nations in general, and as a non-permanent
member of the Council. We tried our best to engage
constructively with all delegations in order to achieve
concrete results in this vast and complex agenda of
international peace and security in an increasingly
complex and challenging world. Our Foreign Minister’s
participation in five Council meetings in October and
November on the Palestine question illustrates the
importance we attach to the Council and to the matters
under its consideration. We championed our positions
while respecting the diversity of values, opinions and
interests within the Council in order to adequately fulfil
our role as a non-permanent member for the eleventh
time in the Council’s history.
Once again, with President Lula’s leadership and
personal involvement, Brazil tried hard to make a
serious contribution to that collective effort by just
being Brazil, the Brazil that is back — a country that
talks to every country in the friendliest way; that has
no quarrels except with poverty, inequality, inhumanity
and injustice; that has an engaged interest in all
important matters discussed in the United Nations;
that builds bridges, seeks consensus, acts faithfully
as an honest broker and values and defends peace,

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
8/19 23-42031
international law, multilateralism and their synthesis
and symbol, the Charter of the United Nations. Most
of all, if I may borrow Lincoln’s words, it is a country
that acts with malice towards none, with charity for
all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see
the right. And if I may add a personal note, I am most
thankful for this six-month crash course in multilateral
affairs in this worldly classroom. My dear colleagues
and their teams have all been wonderful teachers to this
old bilateralist, who hopes to have learned at least some
of the most multiple skills and statesmanship that they
exhibit here every single session.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta thanks the United Arab
Emirates for taking the initiative to work on resolution
2720 (2023). I express our appreciation to Ambassador
Nusseibeh and her team for their valiant efforts and for
organizing the very important trip to Rafah.
Malta has consistently expressed grave concern
and sought to alleviate the dire humanitarian crisis
in the Gaza Strip. Over the past three months, that
humanitarian crisis has been severely aggravated by the
obstruction of adequate emergency humanitarian aid
and personnel, food and water into Gaza. The untenable
situation required our urgent attention. That is why we
have voted in favour of this text, and we demand its full
implementation and that of resolution 2712 (2023).
However, we remain firm in our belief that an
immediate ceasefire is the only tangible and realistic
measure that can ease the suffering and extreme hardship
of the Gazan people. We reiterate that all parties must
comply with their obligations under international law,
including those regarding the protection of civilians
and civilian sites, with accountability for those who
violate them. Medical and humanitarian personnel and
their assets must be protected to allow the population
safety, reprieve and dignity in times of acute crisis and
anguish. We are already much too late.
We welcome the establishment of an aid
monitoring mechanism for Gaza, as outlined in this
resolution. However, its implementation must not
add an additional barrier or slow down the principled
delivery of humanitarian assistance. On the contrary,
it should rapidly and efficiently facilitate it. We expect
that the technical expertise and vast experience of
the United Nations will direct the implementation of
this mechanism, in coordination with relevant States.
Without that, the desperately needed United Nations
humanitarian response will be placed in jeopardy,
and the United Nations and humanitarian response be
placed at great risk.
In conclusion, the end of hostilities must also be
accompanied by a political urgency to build a durable
foundation for peace. We welcome the resolution’s
clear and unwavering commitment to the two-State
solution, in which two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side in peace and security, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
internationally agreed parameters.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
repeatedly postponed Security Council vote today has
received extensive attention by all. Over the past few
days, in order to maximize consensus, the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates made tireless efforts and
resubmitted the draft resolution late last night. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2720 (2023), which
was put to a vote just now.
For reasons known to all, quite a number of
adjustments on important aspects of the resolution have
been made, and those adjustments are not consistent with
the efforts we made and do not meet our expectations.
At the same time, given the urgency of the situation on
the ground and given the humanitarian catastrophe in
Gaza that is getting more dire by the day, the Council’s
present action offers at least a glimmer of hope for more
and faster delivery of humanitarian supplies to Gaza. Of
course, whether that glimmer of hope can be truly felt
by the people of Gaza in the midst of the disaster also
depends on whether the resolution can be effectively
implemented and whether the relevant provisions of the
resolution can be carried out without compromise.
We expect urgent actions to be taken pursuant
to the Council resolution to expand humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, including by making full use of the
Kerem Shalom crossing and the opening of additional
crossings to ensure the safe and unimpeded entry of
sufficient humanitarian supplies into Gaza.
We hope that the monitoring mechanism newly
provided for in the resolution will be put in place as soon
as possible. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
timely reporting to the Council on the implementation
of the resolution. The Council should stand ready to
take further actions at any time to resolve the problems
and difficulties encountered in the implementation of
the resolution.

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 9/19
The resolution reaffirms that all parties to the conflict
must comply with their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law. We urge Israel
to immediately reverse its course, cease its indiscriminate
military attacks and stop its collective punishment of
the population of Gaza. As the occupying Power, Israel
has an obligation to safeguard the humanitarian needs
of the population of Gaza and to guarantee the safety of
humanitarian workers in Gaza.
It should be observed that the realization of a ceasefire
remains the overriding prerequisite. Only a ceasefire can
prevent greater casualties of civilians, including hostages;
only a ceasefire can prevent the regional conflict from
spiralling out of control and only a ceasefire can prevent the
prospects for a political settlement from being completely
destroyed. That is the reason why we voted in favour
of Russia’s amendment. We regret that the amendment
was vetoed.
Going forward, China would like to work with all
Council members to promote further responsible and
meaningful action by the Council in a timely manner and
to continue to make unremitting efforts to bring an end to
the fighting in Gaza to effectively implement the two-State
solution and to realize peace and stability in the Middle East
at an early date.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): The catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Gaza needs urgent attention
and meaningful action by the Council. Therefore,
we are deeply grateful for the United Arab Emirates
and our friends in the Group of Arab States for their
constructive engagement with all Council members to
that end.
Japan voted in favour of resolution 2720 (2023).
Given the deepening humanitarian crisis, it is
indispensable to immediately scale up emergency
assistance to and throughout Gaza. There is no safe
place for the people in Gaza, and they cannot wait
any longer for the Council to act. We also demand the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages.
Therefore, we are pleased that the Council finally
adopted another resolution today to address urgent
humanitarian needs in Gaza, and we hope that will be a
first step towards real change on the ground.
Full-fledged but sensitive diplomacy is under way
to further scale up emergency humanitarian assistance
to Gaza. In that vein, we highly appreciate the serious
diplomatic efforts that the United States has been
conducting in the region to improve the situation on the
ground. The entry of humanitarian convoys into Gaza
through the Kerem Shalom crossing is one of the results
of those efforts, but more needs to be done.
Japan, as a responsible member of the Security
Council, remains committed to addressing the
devastating humanitarian crisis in Gaza. Even now,
gunfire and bombardment continue, and that must stop
immediately for a period that allows for meaningful
humanitarian operations to aid those who are enduring
the grave humanitarian catastrophe and suffering.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland voted in favour of resolution 2720 (2023)
and welcomes its adoption.
I would like to thank the delegation of the United
Arab Emirates and all colleagues — Council members,
as well as colleagues from the region — for their tireless
efforts to find a compromise in order to alleviate the
disastrous humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. It
is essential that the Council speak out in favour of the
protection of civilians.
The images of the Rafah crossing clearly show
that the civilian population is desperate. It needs the
immediate support of the international community to
survive. While such a compromise, by its nature, falls
far short of many expectations, the adoption of the
resolution, like the opening of the Kerem Shalom crossing,
is a contribution to that end. The resolution provides for
a humanitarian and reconstruction coordinator post to
establish a United Nations mechanism that should allow
all the necessary flexibility to expedite and streamline
the process and ensure that humanitarian aid reaches
those in need as quickly as possible.
Switzerland welcomes the agreement reached by
the Council, which should contribute to an effective
implementation of life-saving humanitarian aid on the
ground. With the same aim of facilitating rapid, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access, the resolution
calls for the creation of conditions for a lasting
ceasefire, without prejudice to Israel’s right to ensure
its defence and security. That should make it possible to
ensure the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages who have been held since the terrorist attacks
of 7 October, which Switzerland firmly condemned.
Today’s resolution must be complementary to
international humanitarian law, according to which all
parties to the conflict, as well as non-warring States,

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
10/19 23-42031
have the obligation to authorize and facilitate rescue
operations for populations in need.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We commend the United
Arab Emirates as penholder and others involved from
the region and from outside for the tremendous efforts
to bring forward resolution 2720 (2023), which we
just adopted.
We welcome the adoption of that important
resolution and consider it an important step forward in
dealing with the urgency of the dire situation in Gaza.
We would have liked a more robust text, including
on some important key issues that are missing there,
but the text has clear merits, which guided our position.
And we welcome the establishment of a clear and
straightforward mechanism to allow unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance at scale to the population in
Gaza and make a real difference on the ground.
People in Gaza are going hungry. They need
assistance. Countless families are in dire need. They
must be helped now, today and every day.
Therefore, it is urgent for the United Nations to step
up, and that is all the resolution provides for — urgent
steps to immediately allow safe, unhindered and
expanded humanitarian access at scale and to create
the conditions for a sustainable cessation of hostilities.
We call for and look forward to the speedy and full
implementation of the resolution.
But we want to be clear: we support the cessation
of hostilities with the aim of saving civilians, helping
innocent Palestinians to rebuild their lives, all those
who are trapped in a bloody conflict — children,
women and entire families — everyone who does not
deserve to suffer or die.
Therefore, our vote in favour cannot and must not
be seen, understood or misused by Hamas in any way or
any circumstance, directly or indirectly, as condoning
the unacceptable and the unjustifiable and its continued
use of what belongs to and should go only to the people
of Gaza, to plan and attack Israel and its population, as
it has been doing since 7 October.
All Palestinians must unite under the leadership of
the Palestinian Authority, pursue the path of peace and
negotiations and use all political means to build their
future, have their State and ensure their freedom and
dignity, living together and alongside Israel in security.
That is a clear position we have expressed repeatedly
over the past two years, and it is one of the key wishes
and hopes that we will keep with us as we exit the
Security Council.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France thanks the United Arab Emirates for
preparing resolution 2720 (2023) and appreciates its
efforts throughout the negotiations process. France
welcomes the adoption today of a resolution that makes
it possible to respond to the humanitarian emergency
on the ground and improve the delivery of aid to Gaza,
where the humanitarian crisis worsens by the day.
We all saw the reports yesterday of a serious risk
of famine in Gaza. The Secretary-General sounded
the alarm over the ongoing humanitarian tragedy in
Gaza. It is urgent to deliver more humanitarian aid
to the civilian population of Gaza, who need it more
than ever. The resolution calls for urgent measures to
be taken to create the conditions for a lasting cessation
of hostilities.
We would have preferred if the Council could
have expressed itself in a more ambitious manner on
the subject. Since the start of the conflict, France has
advocated an immediate, lasting humanitarian truce
that should lead to a lasting ceasefire. Like resolution
2712 (2023), the resolution adopted today once again
calls for the immediate and unconditional release of
the hostages. Both resolutions must be immediately
respected and implemented, just like international law
more broadly.
Resolution 2720 (2023) is also in line with France’s
efforts to mobilize the international community in
the face of the scale of the crisis, including during
the international humanitarian conference held on
9 November, which made it possible to collect more
than €1 billion in pledges.
It is for those reasons that France voted in favour of
the resolution.
The French President and the Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs have been travelling in the region
in recent days. In Jordan yesterday, the President
supported the creation of a humanitarian platform.
He reiterated the crucial importance of working
immediately towards a ceasefire. Only a ceasefire will
allow the reopening of an essential political horizon.
France recalls that international humanitarian law
must be applied in all circumstances and that full, safe
and unimpeded access to humanitarian actors must be

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 11/19
guaranteed. We must protect humanitarian personnel,
as well as medical and hospital staff.
The text must now be fully implemented.
The Council must also condemn in the strongest
terms the terrorist attacks that were committed by
Hamas and other terrorist groups on 7 October,
including the sexual violence used to dehumanize
and terrorize victims. It is incomprehensible that the
Council has still not been able to do so — yet it must,
as law and morality demand it.
France will continue to resolutely commit to the
full mobilization of the Council on all aspects of the
security, humanitarian and political crisis. France
recalls the urgency of better protecting the lives of
Palestinian civilians and contributing to a rapid end to
the crisis based on the two-State solution — the only
path towards building a just and lasting peace.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I wish to begin by
expressing our sincere appreciation to the United Arab
Emirates for its tireless work leading to the adoption of
resolution 2720 (2023), which is aimed at responding
to the humanitarian catastrophe currently unfolding
in Gaza.
Mozambique’s vote in favour of the resolution
reflects our strong commitment to the principle of the
protection of civilians, whether currently in Gaza or
during any armed conflict. We are mindful of the fact
that, while the resolution is not a perfect text, it clearly
states the basic principles that must guide the parties
and that ought to be upheld by world at large.
As the Secretary-General has said and as
international law asserts, even wars have laws that
must be observed. In that connection, the resolution
emphasizes the importance of international
humanitarian law and humanitarian access. It is an
effort to respond to the critical role of humanitarian
personnel in providing aid to civilians affected by the
conflict. Mozambique’s position is aligned with the
global efforts to safeguard civilians and uphold their
rights during times of conflict.
Together with other members of the Security
Council, in our national capacity, we visited a hospital
in Rafah and the Rafah border crossing. We could see
with our own eyes and feel with our own hearts the
tragedy that has befallen the Palestinian people. We
therefore strongly believe that resolution 2720 (2023) is
an important step towards alleviating the humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian civilian population throughout
the Gaza Strip.
Civilians in Gaza need sufficient food, water,
sanitation, electricity, telecommunications and medical
services for their immediate survival. By voting in
favour of the resolution, we emphasize the critical
need for urgent humanitarian aid to reach civilians in
Gaza during the ongoing conflict. The situation is dire
and immediate action is necessary to prevent further
humanitarian suffering. We reiterate the urgency of
that demand to the parties to the conflict to allow and
facilitate access by all possible means and of all forms
of humanitarian aid to civilians in Gaza.
The resolution is also crucial to operationalize the
implementation of resolution 2712 (2023). However,
the best alternative for peace to prevail in the Gaza
Strip remains a durable and sustained cessation of
hostilities and the return to a constructive dialogue
between the parties. We reiterate Mozambique’s call for
dialogue between Israel and Palestine. In the midst of
long-standing tensions, open communication remains
essential for the negotiated settlement of conflicts.
We hope that both parties will heed that call and work
towards a constructive dialogue that can pave the way
for understanding and reconciliation.
We strongly believe that the Palestinian people and
the Israeli people can live and coexist side by side in
peace and security, thereby fulfilling the numerous
relevant decisions and resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
commending the United Arab Emirates for all the
efforts it has put into resolution 2720 (2023) to enable
the Security Council to obtain an outcome that we hope
will scale up the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
the people of Gaza.
While we believe it is time for the hostilities to end
and for dialogue and diplomacy to be given a chance,
Ghana voted in favour of resolution 2720 (2023)
because with so many lives lost — mostly of women
and children — and with many more on the verge of
starvation, famine and pestilence, it is imperative
that we take every opportunity that can help to save
lives, facilitate humanitarian access and delivery
to the millions of civilians in Gaza and address the
deteriorating humanitarian conditions on the ground.

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
12/19 23-42031
As the resolution we have adopted rightly
emphasizes, all parties to the conflict have an obligation
to comply with international law, in particular as it
impacts the protection of civilians and their well-being.
The need to fully respect United Nations premises,
personnel and assets also cannot be overemphasized.
We welcome the decision to open the Kerem Shalom
border crossing to enhance the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and call for the easing of all rigid procedures
to speed up the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We also reiterate the call for the immediate and
unconditional release of all hostages.
As these will be Ghana’s final remarks on this
subject during our present membership of the Security
Council, we urge the Council not to lose sight of its
historical responsibility for the implementation of
the two-State solution, even in this the darkest of
moments. We believe, as we have often stated, that the
two-State solution, on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as a shared capital, is the key to the
resolution of the instability in the Middle East. In that
regard, the renewal of the political horizon should be a
commitment from which the Council should not waver.
Finally, we express the hope that the implementation
of the resolution just adopted will be done in good faith
to save human lives in both the Gaza Strip and Israel,
and we view the appointment by the Secretary-General
of a representative in that regard as important. May the
coming year open new paths of opportunity to resolve
this decades-long conflict.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Earlier when I introduced our oral amendment,
I said that the vote on it would be a moment of truth,
and so it was. The United States once again showed its
true colours in front of the entire world, blocking an
extremely weak call on the part of the Council for a
cessation of hostilities in Gaza. Instead, Washington
is playing an already extremely underhanded game,
essentially forcing into the text license for Israel to
kill Palestinian civilians in Gaza, under the pretext of
creating the conditions for a cessation of hostilities.
Today at a briefing, the White House National
Security Council Coordinator for Strategic
Communications, John Kirby, said that Israeli
authorities understand the need to reduce the intensity
of the fighting in the Gaza Strip and that it is up to them
to take the decision about the timeline of when that will
take place.
This is a tragic moment for the Council — not a
moment of triumph for multilateral diplomacy, but
rather one of gross, unprincipled blackmail and open
scorn on the part of Washington for the suffering of
Palestinians and the hopes of the global community to
put an end to it. Today the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America spoke about Washington’s
direct high-level bilateral diplomacy. We have heard
that argument in the past and we can see where it has
led. The Security Council is essentially being asked not
to get in the way as the United States twists arms in
the region, not for the sake of peace, as my American
colleague asserts, but for the sake of ensuring
Washington’s narrow self-interests.
If the document had not been supported by a
number of Arab states, we would of course have vetoed
it. At the same time, we note that some sponsors,
including Arab States, withdrew their co-sponsorship.
However, we are always of the view that the Arab world
is able to take decisions and bear full responsibility
for them. That is the only reason we did not block the
document. However, I want to again underscore that
we categorically do not agree with the content of the
current paragraph 2 and believe that responsibility for
all possible consequences lies with the States that gave
their consent to its wording, which was forced through
by the United States. We will not put our names to it.
Regardless of the outcomes of today’s voting,
a clear demand by the Security Council for a full-
fledged ceasefire remains the imperative. Without it,
as the experience of resolution 2712 (2023) has already
shown, implementing Security Council resolutions in
Gaza is simply impossible. On 8 December during his
statement to the Council (see S/PV.9498), Secretary-
General António Guterres unambiguously stated that,
and the same conclusion emerges from his letter to the
Council about options for monitoring resolution 2712
(2023). We are of the view that, whatever its resistance
and however much the United States might protect its
ally in the region, the Council will return to the issue
and precisely and unambiguously demand a cessation
of hostilities.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): For the
record, I would like to state that the draft resolution
that was put into blue on Friday received 83 sponsors
from the membership, but that today’s resolution 2720
(2023) was not open for co-sponsorship, due to the last
minute nature of the negotiations and due to the fact
that it was put into blue only this morning, so no one

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 13/19
withdrew their co-sponsorship. It had not been open
for co-sponsorship, but I am sure that it would have
received widespread support if it had been.
I would like to reflect on the voting that just took
place and what it says about this conflict and this
body. We welcome its adoption and are grateful for
the Council’s support. We believe that the resolution
begins to unblock life-saving aid, whose denial has
condemned more than half a million people in Gaza to
famine. The text compels the international community
to finally share in the burden that Egypt has been
shouldering, and it commits all of us to breaking the
cruel blockade strangling Gaza for the past 16 years.
But the Palestinian struggle is singular in how every
instance of progress serves as a reminder of the scale
of the tragedy.
It is not lost on us that, while today we start
building a humanitarian architecture that responds to
an intolerable situation, we are still unable to stop the
war. It is not lost on us that, despite the incalculable
damage visited upon them with impunity, Palestinians
are asked to accept that diplomacy is the art of what is
possible. It is not lost on us that, although what has been
possible has been brutally inadequate, they have kept
faith in the international system. But what is possible
is not predetermined; it is the product of active choices.
The collective choices of the Council, influenced
by its structure, have shaped this grim reality. They can
help shape a different future. Doing that must begin by
understanding that 30 years after they recognized the
State of Israel, there is very little left for Palestinians to
concede. The injustice of the occupation persists with
the international community’s complicity. If you have a
moral, national or political interest in saving the two-
State solution, you must act now.
This resolution gives us an opportunity to
demonstrate that, at the very least, the world will not
tolerate the continued deprivation of the people of Gaza
from basic necessities. It puts in place a system that is
necessary now and that will remain necessary when the
war ends. We are all responsible for making sure that
it works.
We thank each and every Council member for
their dedication and support to the process, including
the 10 elected members of the Security Council for
their steadfast unity on this file. I would like to thank
the United States again, and the United Kingdom, for
their important constructive diplomatic work behind
the scenes on this issue. I would also like to thank the
Ecuadorian presidency for its patience and wisdom
in enabling this adoption despite very challenging
negotiations. To the United States, I would like to
thank Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, whose
personal dedication and commitment to help save lives
made today possible.
This outcome will enable life-saving humanitarian
assistance to get into Gaza and reach those in need. It
will quite literally make the difference between life and
death for hundreds, if not thousands, of civilians. It is
vital that the Council live up to its responsibility by
ensuring its full implementation. But as we help save
lives here in Gaza so too must we focus here on restoring
the hope of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Today’s resolution is an important step on the long
journey ahead. Any lasting and comprehensive solution
demands an end to the war in Gaza, addressing the
dramatic situation of those internally displaced, uniting
Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and
representative Palestinian Authority, reconstructing
what has been destroyed and ensuring that never
again shall violence, incitement and terror be allowed
to thrive.
None of this will be sustainable if there is no
equality between Israelis and Palestinians in charting
their shared destiny together. It can never be a just
peace if equality and dignity are not the basis of it. This
resolution gives us a signal of that political horizon
ahead. The two-State solution with an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State is the only path to achieving
just peace that guarantees security, stability and
prosperity for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples alike,
who both have a right to statehood on their ancestral
land. The United Arab Emirates will never tire in its
pursuit of that goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Ecuador.
Ecuador voted in favour of resolution 2720 (2023),
which we just adopted and was the result of a laborious
negotiation process, the success of which demonstrates
the good faith and constructive spirit that we are capable
of achieving. We appreciate the willingness shown by
all members, and we hope that such a dynamic can be
recreated to address other issues.

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
14/19 23-42031
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is desperate
and heartbreaking. Several of us were able to see it
first-hand during last week’s visit, and providing relief
is — and must be — a priority. The aid reaching the
Strip is insufficient to meet the needs of the civilian
population. The text of the resolution we adopted is
aimed at significantly increasing the amount of aid and
calls for taking the necessary steps to make that happen.
In that regard, the resolution calls for increasing the
number of entry routes and establishing mechanisms to
optimize the inspection process. For Ecuador, it is of the
utmost importance that humanitarian aid be sufficient
and continuous and, at the same time, that it be subject
to adequate inspections to ensure that such aid is secure
and reliable. The resolution in no way contradicts the
provisions of the previous resolution 2712 (2023),
which we adopted last month, and must constitute a
further step towards a humanitarian ceasefire, which
we believe to be inevitable and urgent.
In the text of the resolution, the Council condemns
the violations of international humanitarian law,
violence against civilians and acts of terrorism. It also
demands the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages. It cannot be otherwise. Ecuador reaffirms its
full condemnation of the terrorist acts perpetrated by
Hamas since 7 October and believes that the text could
have clearly mentioned the fact that the hostages are
in the hands of Hamas and other groups. But Ecuador
is well aware that the perfect is the enemy of the good
and that the top priority is the humanitarian situation.
Likewise, at times such as these, it is imperative that the
text reaffirms the commitment of the Security Council
to the two-State solution. Ecuador is convinced that
that is the only path to peace and security in the region.
We hope that the resolution can be implemented with
the urgency that the situation requires and that it will
effectively help alleviate the humanitarian situation.
I would like to commend the delegation of the
United Arab Emirates, which ends its term on Council
this month and led the negotiations on this important
resolution, which we were pleased to see adopted during
our presidency. Ecuador has made efforts to preside
over the Council constructively and responsibly, during
which time its highest-level authorities, President
Noboa Azín and Foreign Minister Sommerfeld,
presided over the Council and sought to build bridges
making outcomes such as today’s possible.
In conclusion, let me thank all the outgoing
members — Albania, Brazil, the United Arab Emirates,
Gabon and Ghana — for their contributions and tireless
work over the past two years in the Security Council.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): The Security Council
first met (see S/PV.9439) to address this grave crisis
when hundreds of Palestinians had been killed by
Israel, the occupying Power, in its siege of, and
aggression against, the Gaza Strip. The Council is
now meeting after more than 20,000 Palestinians have
been killed — almost half of them children — 60,000
people have been wounded and 2 million Palestinians
have been forcibly displaced. It is meeting as homes,
shelters, schools and hospitals have been destroyed and
as hunger and disease are spreading like wildfire. No
one should forget that what we are talking about are
the 2.3 million Palestinians who have been fighting
for their lives and facing death every single day for 75
days. They have been fighting for their lives and very
existence for more than 75 days.
The Group of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, with the support of the
overwhelming number of United Nations States
Members, have been mobilizing to achieve three
objectives, which we have said from the beginning:
an immediate end to the carnage and an immediate
ceasefire, humanitarian assistance at scale and no
forced displacement. We meet today as part of this
continuous effort to advance the three goals.
Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to all the
humanitarian and health-care workers who, at their
own peril, are risking their lives and struggling every
single day to address and alleviate an occupation-made
humanitarian catastrophe of unprecedented scale. They
are operating under conditions where no place and no one
is safe, under widespread and indiscriminate bombing,
where hospitals, shelters and ambulances are shelled,
and with minimal to no access to humanitarian supplies
necessary to sustain and save lives. We pay tribute to
the Palestine Red Crescent, members of which many
Council members met during their visit to the Rafah
crossing; to Palestinian medical and civilian rescue
teams; to the personnel of the United Nations and its
agencies, notably the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; to the
members of Palestinian and international humanitarian
organizations on the ground; and to the International

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 15/19
Committee of the Red Cross. Their work is heroic and
deserves our utmost recognition and respect. Resolution
2720 (2023), submitted by the United Arab Emirates, is
intended to allow them to conduct their sacred mission
to assist civilians in need and save human lives as Israel,
the occupying Power, continues to ignore the global
demands for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire and
deprive the Palestinian people of the humanitarian aid
they desperately need.
There are thousands of trucks of humanitarian aid
on the Egyptian side, and Egypt is fully willing and
poised to see that aid delivered. On their visit, Council
members saw those thousands of truckloads lined up
from the Al-Arish airport to the Rafah crossing. There
are more than 2 million Palestinians in desperate need
of such aid on the Palestinian side. This inhumane and
criminal Israeli siege and the use of humanitarian aid
necessary for the survival of the population as a method
of warfare have to end and must end now.
On 4 November, the Deputy Head of the Israeli
Civil Administration stated from inside Gaza:
“Whoever returns here, if they return here after,
will find scorched earth. No houses. No agriculture.
No nothing. They have no future”.
This is just one statement among far too many
demonstrating in shocking terms that what we are
dealing with is an attempt at the destruction of our
people and their displacement forever from their land.
This is Israel’s goal, its true objective: no future for
Palestinians in Palestine. That is why it is bombing
everyone and everything. That is why it targets homes,
hospitals, schools, bakeries, agricultural fields and
water and sanitation networks, so that the sustenance
of life becomes impossible — and it has become
impossible. That is why it targets the landmarks of
Gaza, which bear witness to its ancient history and
to our roots in the land — our historic churches and
mosques, our monuments and our architecture.
Israel also targets the storytellers, those who capture
our people’s lives, suffering and death, including the
journalists conveying to the world the truth about the
massacres, about this grave and unbearable injustice
being endured by Palestinian people and their families.
But Israel’s targets are not only the past and the present
of our people, but indeed also the future. That is why
it kills our doctors, engineers, poets, academics and
artists. That is why it is destroying our cities and towns,
our universities and cultural institutions. That is why
it kills our children and terrorizes and traumatizes
them, scarring and disfiguring their futures. We often
quote the number of children killed — an unbearable
tragedy — but we should not forget that 25,000 children
have been orphaned and tens of thousands wounded or
had limbs amputated.
A 12-year-old Palestinian girl with the most
beautiful of names, Dunya — which, in Arabic, means
the whole world — lost both her parents, her sister and
her brother, who were all killed in the Israeli shelling
of her house. She also lost her leg, and I believe that
she was interviewed by the CNN journalist the United
Arab Emirates managed to let enter the Gaza Strip so
she could make her important report. Dunya said that,
while she will never forget her loved ones, she must
continue living and that she would become a doctor to
help children as doctors helped her. But Dunya did not
live to become a doctor or to memorialize her family.
She was killed a few days later in the strike on the
maternity ward of Al-Nasr Hospital. Israel wants to
convince us that we need to choose between life and
our country by making life in our country impossible.
Our people want to live in their country. They want
their children to grow up safely in their country. There
is no simpler dream, there is no aspiration more sacred
than that.
Israel’s treatment of Palestinian civilians and its
abhorrent crimes against them were even more starkly
revealed after Israel killed three people raising a white
flag and representing no danger. It later discovered that
they were three Israelis who had been held captive in
Gaza. It could have saved them, had it observed the laws
of war, but it thought they were Palestinians and shot
them in yet another display of total, abject disregard
for Palestinian lives. That confirms the many reports
of summary executions of Palestinians, murdered
in cold blood by Israeli soldiers in Gaza. Israel has
also continued its ill treatment and mass arrest and
humiliation of Palestinians in despicable scenes filmed
by its own soldiers, boasting about their depravity. They
are the soldiers of a rogue army, which is unhinged and
empowered by the impunity it enjoys. Certain that it
will not be held accountable, it is an army that commits
atrocities every single day. In the words of Israel’s
closest allies, its indiscriminate bombing and its killing
rage must stop. That means its crimes must stop. Gaza
is like a patient whose wounds you are trying to treat
while the killer keeps shooting at them — the killer
must be stopped, or the patient will never be saved.

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
16/19 23-42031
Death is everywhere in Gaza in its different
manifestations — destruction, deprivation and
disease. People are starving, they have no water, no
food and no medicine — or barely any. The resolution
that the Council adopted today is intended to help
to address this inhumane situation, to alleviate the
untold suffering and pain being borne by millions
of civilians. We welcome the decision to establish a
United Nations mechanism to accelerate the provision
of humanitarian relief consignments to Gaza and call
for its rapid implementation. The Council also called
for urgent steps to immediately allow safe, unhindered
and expanded humanitarian access. The Secretary-
General and all United Nations agencies, as well as
humanitarian organizations, have all said that this
requires an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, which is
now backed by 153 States around the world. It took the
Council 75 days to finally utter the words “cessation
of hostilities”, 40 days after the General Assembly
first referred to that objective and tens of thousands
of killed Palestinians later. We support the Russian
amendment, and the United Arab Emirates, as the
Arab representative, reflected that support in its vote.
Of course, that paragraph was endorsed in the original
blue text by the 83 co-sponsors.
The resolution is also clear about the unwavering
commitment to the two-State solution, consistent with
international law and United Nations resolutions, and
in that context, it is also clear on the status of the Gaza
Strip as an integral part of the territory occupied in
1967 and as part of the Palestinian State, the unity
of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, the role of the
Palestinian Authority and the complete rejection of
forced displacement in violation of international law.
Let us act now to save lives and to provide
life-saving assistance and life-sustaining hope. This
resolution is a step in the right direction. It must be
implemented and accompanied by massive pressure
for an immediate ceasefire — I repeat, an immediate
ceasefire. There is no way to stop the war crimes,
the crimes against humanity and the genocide under
way, other than an immediate ceasefire. I repeat, a
ceasefire. There is no way to start addressing the
occupation-made humanitarian catastrophe, other
than an immediate ceasefire. I repeat, a ceasefire.
There is no way to release those held captive other
than through an immediate ceasefire. This resolution
calls for protection of civilians, deplores attacks
against civilians, rejects forced displacement, calls
for immediate and safe humanitarian access and for
humanitarian aid to reach the Palestinian population.
All that requires an immediate ceasefire, as requested
and as called for by the Secretary-General in his famous
letter to the Security Council (S/2023/962). Humanity
must prevail. International law must prevail. Millions
of lives hang in the balance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Miller (Israel): Just a week ago, Jaish Al-Adl
carried out a terror attack in Iran in which 11 Iranian
police officers were killed. Within one day, the
Security Council released a press statement (SC/15534)
condemning the act of terror. It took the Security Council
one day to express its condolences and sympathy with
the families of the victims. It is true — terrorism must
be condemned, even if the attacks are perpetrated
against police officers of a rogue regime and the world’s
leading sponsor of global terror.
Seventy-seven days ago, Hamas intentionally
murdered, raped and mutilated 1,300 Israelis and
took 250 hostages, and the Council still has yet to
issue a single statement condemning Hamas and their
atrocities. In addition to the Council’s inability to
condemn Hamas’s attack, 130 hostages — women,
children and the elderly — are still being held in Gaza,
and they must not be allowed to become a footnote.
Humanitarian aid is pouring into Gaza every single
day, yet the hostages being held by Hamas are not
even allowed visits by the Red Cross. That is the most
heinous war crime imaginable. The hostages must be at
the top of the Council’s agenda.
There is no doubt that humanitarian aid is crucially
important, and Israel is already facilitating hundreds
of truckloads of aid into Gaza every day. Israel is also
willing and able to exponentially increase the entry
of aid trucks into Gaza. Israel has already opened the
Kerem Shalom crossing in order to ensure the entry of
more trucks and has also facilitated the entry of dozens
of trucks that arrived from Jordan. The only roadblock
for aid entry is the United Nations ability to accept it.
Enhancing United Nations monitoring or coordination
of aid is not a cure-all, and any enhancement of United
Nations aid monitoring cannot be done at the expense of
Israel’s security inspections. Israel has not only a right
but an obligation to guarantee its security. That is why
our mission to eliminate Hamas’s capabilities has not
changed. And that is why security inspections of aid

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 17/19
will not change. Israel will not permit the regrouping
and rearming of Hamas, as the atrocities of 7 October
can never be allowed to repeat themselves.
Israel recently exposed another huge Hamas
terror tunnel that stretches four kilometres and was
constructed 50 metres underground. That terror
tunnel is wide enough for vehicles to drive through.
It can house hundreds of terrorists. The amount of
cement and equipment needed to build that tunnel
alone was immense. That is just one part of Hamas’s
subterranean city of terror, including missile- and
rocket-manufacturing facilities and terrorist-training
complexes across Gaza.
It cannot be claimed that Israel did not give any
warning. For years, we have sent letters outlining
Hamas’s terror threat and growing capabilities. We
have held countless meetings with officials. We have
done everything possible to make it clear that action
must be taken. But our words fell on deaf ears.
If the Council seeks to end hostilities, it should start
by supporting Israel’s mission of returning the hostages
and eliminating the Hamas threat, and at the very least,
it must prevent Hamas’s empowerment. Just as the
Council is committed to increasing aid, it should also be
committed to blocking the smuggling of arms and the
transfer of weapons to the Hamas terrorists. And just as
the Council is committed to ensuring that aid reaches
Gazan civilians, it should also be committed to ensuring
that the aid is not diverted to Hamas terrorists, who do
not care about the civilian population. The focus of any
resolution should also hold Hamas accountable, while
taking every step to prevent them from entrenching
themselves and regaining power.
Hamas is a genocidal terror organization. Hamas is
a direct threat to the security of Israel, to Gazans and
to regional stability. In order to promote security, the
Council should first recognize Hamas’s terror regime
and then focus on the elimination of its threats. It should
be focused on freeing the hostages. It should be focused
on preventing Hamas from exploiting aid. It should be
focused on ensuring that Hamas can no longer expand
their terror infrastructure. Any resolution adopted
by the Council should be focused primarily on those
points. That is the Council’s responsibility, and that is
key to security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of Egypt, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the Security Council’s success today
in adopting the important and influential resolution
2720 (2023), which will facilitate humanitarian access
and increase the aid provided to the Gaza Strip. That
will also be achieved through the appointment by the
Secretary-General of a coordinator for humanitarian
affairs and reconstruction to undertake the tasks of
facilitating and coordinating aid and establishing an
international humanitarian mechanism to work inside
the Gaza Strip under the banner and supervision of the
United Nations, with the aim of addressing the horrific
humanitarian catastrophe to which the residents of the
Gaza Strip have been exposed for the third month in
a row as a result of the devastating war that Israel is
waging against the defenceless Palestinian people. Let
me also extend my thanks to the United Arab Emirates
and its Permanent Mission to the United Nations for
the sincere and tireless efforts it has made and its
extensive consultations with members of the Security
Council and international organizations in order to
adopt that resolution and to make every effort to make
it successful. We appreciate and thank the United Arab
Emirates for its efforts.
The resolution that was adopted today builds on the
previous comprehensive draft resolution submitted by
the Group of Arab States and the Islamic Group and
sponsored by 81 countries in implementation of the
decisions of the extraordinary Arab-Islamic summit
held in Riyadh on 11 November, regarding lifting
the humanitarian siege imposed on our Palestinian
brothers in Gaza. The adoption of today’s resolution
is a step on the right path towards addressing the
bloody humanitarian repercussions of the war on
Gaza and ensuring the continuity and sustainability of
aid access to the Strip, without hindrance, through a
mechanism supervised by the United Nations, so that
humanitarian work does not remain hostage to the will
of the occupying Power, which cannot, logically or
legally, be considered a neutral party when it comes to
the provision of humanitarian support.
We hope that this resolution will contribute to
supporting the efforts of the international community
to provide aid to the Gaza Strip, which, despite Egypt’s
tireless efforts to provide the maximum support
possible to our Palestinian brothers, including food and
medicine, is still experiencing a horrific humanitarian
catastrophe unprecedented since the Second World War,

S/PV.9520 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/12/2023
18/19 23-42031
in the light of more than 20,000 martyrs, of whom more
than 70 per cent are women and children, and more
than 53,000 persons wounded. In addition to the severe
shortage of food and medicine, Gaza is suffering from
a starvation siege and the comprehensive destruction
of basic infrastructure, homes, hospitals and medical
centres. That catastrophic situation is accompanied
by the escalation of incursions carried out by the
Israeli army into cities of the West Bank, killing and
injuring people, in addition to the continuing attacks
by settlers in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
which we fear could lead to a spillover throughout the
Palestinian territories.
Egypt expresses its thanks and appreciation to the
Secretary-General. We thank him again for his efforts
over the past period and for his continuous calls for
a humanitarian ceasefire. We thank him for calling
the attention of the Security Council to the threat to
international peace and security posed by the situation
in Palestine. We thank him for the letter he addressed
to the Security Council invoking Article 99 of the
Charter (S/2023/962). We also express our appreciation
to Mr. Philippe Lazarini, Commissioner General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We pay tribute
to all the heroic UNRWA staff, first for the sacrifices
made by UNRWA and its tireless efforts in the hardest
conditions in Gaza, as well as for the Commissioner
General, who addressed the General Assembly to
highlight the collapse of the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip. That bolstered our endeavours to submit
resolution 2720 (2023), adopted today.
Now that the Security Council has assumed its
responsibilities and adopted that resolution, we look
forward to the bodies and agencies of the United
Nations implementing it immediately. That must be
done by making concerted efforts that will translate the
resolution into a functioning and effective mechanism
on the ground, in coordination with the international
community, which we call upon to mobilize human and
financial resources. That will lead to implementing
the objectives of that resolution, namely, achieving
sustainable humanitarian access without obstacles
in the Gaza Strip. That step should be followed by
other steps.
The first must be to compel Israel, the occupying
Power, to immediately cease fire and halt all hostilities
without any condition in all parts of Gaza. Every
effort that aims to alleviate the humanitarian crisis
and support the humanitarian situation will bear fruit
only when the Security Council implements a binding
resolution on a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire
and a cessation of hostilities throughout Gaza without
any conditions, end the killing of civilians, allow
for humanitarian work and provide protection and
security to humanitarian workers. The demand for a
comprehensive and sustainable ceasefire is a response
to the will of the entire international community, as
reflected in the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly during its tenth emergency special session on
12 December, (General Assembly resolution ES-10/22),
which calls for a humanitarian ceasefire. The resolution
garnered 153 votes in favour, which reflects a global
stance that cannot be disputed. No one can argue that
the resolution is not binding, politically or legally.
We stress that the resolution adopted today is not
confined to humanitarian aspects alone. It focuses on
other items that should be implemented. It stresses that
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law must be respected. Civilians and
humanitarian workers must be protected. Relief trucks,
shelters and civilian facilities must also be protected,
along with items indispensable for life. Forced
displacement of Palestinians from their territory
and homeland must be rejected. It is important to
implement the two-State solution in line with United
Nations resolutions. It is also important to safeguard
the unity of the Palestinian territories in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, under a national Palestinian
Authority. All those issues are no less important
than the humanitarian aspect. In that connection,
Egypt reiterates the extreme importance of creating
a political prospect and resuming the negotiation
process conducive to the realization of the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people in establishing
their independent State along the 4 June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is the only path
to ensure the achievement of a comprehensive and just
peace in the region and to ensure security and stability
for all the peoples of the region.
The success achieved today gives hope, even if
slim hope, that must be adhered to and build upon
to end the horrible humanitarian tragedy that we are
witnessing today in the Gaza Strip. We call upon the
Council to make concerted efforts to end that tragedy,
which the unarmed Palestinian people have been facing
for three months.

22/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9520
23-42031 19/19
We hope that the Council will provide protection for
civilians, save innocent people and stop the bloodshed.
Those are the most noble objectives of the Security
Council and of the United Nations at large.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of December, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Ecuador to the
members of the Council and to the Secretariat for the
support they have given us. It has been a busy month
and one in which we rallied to consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, including the
technical support team, conference service officers,
interpreters, translators, verbatim reporters and
security staff. As our presidency draws to a close, I
know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of France good luck in the month of January.
On behalf of the Council, I would also like
to express our sincere thanks to the five outgoing
members: Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the
United Arab Emirates. I commend them for their
hard work and contributions during their terms on the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
