Accessible document Please recycleThis record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation co
ncerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org).
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of
the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
25-01214 (E)
*2501214*
United Nations S/PV.9841
Security Council
Eightieth year
9841st meeting
Monday, 20 January 2025, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Attaf (Algeria)
Members: China Mr Fu Cong
Denmark Ms Lassen
France Mr. De Rivière
Greece Mr. Sekeris
Guyana Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett
Pakistan Mr. Akram
Panama Mr. Ruiz-Hernández
Republic of Korea Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone Mr. Kabba
Slovenia Ms Fajon
Somalia Mr Fiqi
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Mr Falconer
United States of America Ms. Shea
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
2/41 25-01214
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, the
Ministers and the other high-level representatives present in the Chamber. Their
presence today attests to the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, the Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite Her Excellency Ms. Varsen Aghabekian,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Observer State of
Palestine to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting, in accordance with
the provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in this regard
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I also
invite His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Stavros Lambrinidis, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Ahmad Faisal Muhamad, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the presidency of Algeria for convening
this briefing.
The Middle East is in a period of profound transformation, rife with uncertainty
but also possibility. It is clear that the region is being reshaped, but it is far from
clear what will emerge. We have a responsibility to help ensure that the people of the
Middle East come out of this turbulent period with peace, dignity and a horizon of
hope grounded in action
I am just back from Lebanon, where I met with the Lebanese leadership and the
United Nations family, including our peacekeeping troops. A new dawn is rising
in Lebanon, with a Government hopefully in place soon — one that all Lebanese
will feel represented by — and a State that will be able to guarantee security to
all its citizens. The United Nations, including the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the United Nations Interim Force In Lebanon
(UNIFIL), is fully committed to supporting the Lebanese people on that path.
Despite enormous pressure, and with considerable risk, our peacekeeping forces
stood their ground for peace to help deliver a cessation of hostilities. Here, from the
Council, I want to reiterate my profound gratitude and admiration to the women and
men of UNIFIL, and I also extend my deep thanks to the troop-contributing countries.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 3/41
During my visit to southern Lebanon, I saw first-hand the dramatic human
impact and destruction caused by the conflict. Israelis were also victims, suffering
loss and displacement. I fervently hope all from both sides will soon be able to return
to the areas in which they lived and resume their daily lives, and we will do all that
we can to relieve the suffering and support recovery.
I can report that the cessation of hostilities is fragile, but it is holding. UNIFIL
troops are undertaking vital efforts to nurture that process. They are working closely
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. It is vital that the Israeli presence in the south end
as defined in the agreement and that the Lebanese Armed Forces be present in the
totality of Lebanon. In that regard, since 27 November, UNIFIL has carried out more
than 730 missions in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, facilitating their
redeployment in more than 50 positions. UNIFIL has also facilitated 39 humanitarian
missions, in coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, the Lebanese Red
Cross, various United Nations entities and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Our peacekeepers need strengthened capacities, including for clearing mines and
disposing of unexploded ordnance, together with adaptation of the conduct of
operations within their mandate.
Resolution 1701 (2006) is clear: the area between the Blue Line and the Litani
River must be free of all armed personnel, assets and weapons — other than those
of the Government of Lebanon and UNIFIL. The parties must fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006), respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon
and end the violence once and for all. The United Nations will continue to support
all efforts to transform the cessation of hostilities into true peace.
In Gaza, at long last, the ceasefire and hostage release deal offer a ray of hope.
I commend Egypt, Qatar and the United States for their steadfast efforts to secure
that deal. Yesterday the first three female hostages were released as part of the first
phase, and 90 Palestinian prisoners were also released by Israel.
While many challenges lie ahead, we should appreciate the long-overdue relief
that this moment provides to Palestinians in Gaza and to the hostages reunited with
their loved ones. We are doing our part to ensure the rapid scaling-up of humanitarian
deliveries. More than 630 trucks with humanitarian aid entered Gaza yesterday, at
least 300 of them to the north.
I want to repeat that nothing justifies the appalling 7 October 2023 terror
attacks by Hamas, and nothing justifies the dramatic levels of death and destruction
inflicted on the Palestinian people in Gaza. We have been relentless in calling for
an immediate ceasefire, for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages
and for immediate action to protect civilians and ensure the delivery of life-saving
aid. Now the parties must make good on their commitments and fully implement the
deal. I urge the parties to ensure that that deal leads to the release of all hostages and
a permanent ceasefire in Gaza.
For its part, the United Nations will do all it can to advance these efforts, — in
particular to scale up humanitarian aid across Gaza, fully aware of the significant
obstacles, challenges and constraints that we still face. Specifically, the ceasefire
must translate into at least four simultaneous actions on the ground.
First, United Nations entities — including the backbone of our humanitarian
response, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East — must be able to perform their functions without hindrance. The United
Nations must have rapid, safe and unimpeded access through all available channels
and crossings to deliver food, water, medicine, fuel, shelter and materials to repair
infrastructure across Gaza, including the north. Other humanitarian organizations,
including local and international NGOs, and the private sector must also have

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
4/41 25-01214
unimpeded safe passage. Visas, permits and other enabling conditions must be in
place quickly to allow a surge of desperately needed relief.
Secondly, scaling up the delivery of aid and essential services demands safe
conditions and a conducive operating environment. We require the necessary
technical, protective and communications equipment. In order for us to do our work,
the parties must coordinate with the United Nations system in a timely and effective
manner. That also includes the restoration of public order and safety to prevent the
looting of humanitarian supplies.
Thirdly, people must be able to access life-saving aid. That includes medical
evacuations for those who need it, and I urge Member States to take in those patients.
Sufficient commercial supplies must also be allowed to enter Gaza in order to meet
the overwhelming needs of the population.
Fourthly — and fundamentally — civilians must be protected, and those seeking
to return to their communities must have safe passage. Explosive ordnance must be
removed. The recovery of human remains must be conducted with dignity and respect.
I urge the Security Council and all Member States to support all efforts to implement
this ceasefire, bring about a permanent cessation of hostilities, ensure accountability
and create the conditions for recovery and reconstruction. The international media
must also be allowed into Gaza to report on this crucial story on the ground.
We must seize the opportunity presented by the ceasefire deal to intensify efforts
towards addressing governance and security frameworks in Gaza. The Palestinian
Authority has said that it stands ready to assume its role and responsibilities in Gaza.
I urgently call for collective support for the creation of security and governance
arrangements that will enable Gaza to be reunified politically, economically, socially
and administratively with the West Bank.
Regrettably, the situation in the West Bank continues to worsen — with clashes,
airstrikes and unabated illegal settlement expansion and demolitions. I am deeply
concerned about an existential threat to the integrity and contiguity of the occupied
Palestinian territory of Gaza and the West Bank. Israeli administrative changes over
the past two years have streamlined and accelerated the settlement approval process.
As a result, control over many aspects of planning and daily life in Area C of the
West Bank has been transferred to Israeli civilian authorities. Senior Israeli officials
openly speak of formally annexing all or part of the West Bank in the coming months.
Any such annexation would constitute a most serious violation of international law.
It is clear that greater stability in the Middle East requires irreversible action
towards a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, in line with international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. The United
Nations will continue to support every effort to advance peace, stability and a more
hopeful future for Palestinians and Israelis and the broader region.
Finally, with respect to that broader region, allow me to say a few words
about Syria.
For centuries, Syria has been a crossroads of civilizations. Now it stands at a
crossroads of history. Following the fall of the brutal previous regime and years of
bloodshed, there is a possibility of promise for the people of Syria. We cannot let the
flame of hope turn into an inferno of chaos.
The United Nations is committed to working with Syrians and the international
community to support a Syrian-led process that ensures a credible and inclusive
political transition, in line with the key principles of resolution 2254 (2015). I
welcome the steps taken by Member States showing solidarity with Syrians. But
much more significant work in addressing sanctions and designations will inevitably

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 5/41
be necessary, particularly in the light of the country’s urgent economic needs.
Advancing an inclusive political transition is the most effective means to ensure
that Syria receives more support. As Syria travels a new path and seeks to rebuild
its institutions and political systems, we will support an inclusive process in which
the rights of all are fully respected and that paves the way towards a united and
sovereign Syria with its territorial integrity fully re-established.
In Lebanon, Israel, the occupied Palestinian territory, Syria and beyond, let
us keep working for peace and security. As the region is undergoing a profound
transformation, we must spare no effort to help shape it in the form of more justice,
dignity, human rights and peace for all the people of the Middle East.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Aghabekian (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on the Palestinian
issue at the ministerial level. I also thank you, Minister Ahmed Attaf, for presiding
over this meeting, which reflects the attention you have paid to the Palestinian issue
and the fact that it is among your priorities on the agenda of the Security Council.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the delegation of brotherly Algeria
for the important efforts it is making to support the Palestinian people and their
just cause and for all it has done to encourage the Security Council to adopt a firm
position with regard to a ceasefire in Gaza. On behalf of the State of Palestine and its
people and leadership, I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his noble principled position. I also thank all United Nations staff members,
especially those who are working on the ground and providing assistance and relief
to our people, in the catastrophic humanitarian situation we are witnessing. I would
also like to thank Their Excellencies, the Ministers participating in this meeting.
We are addressing the Security Council today with our hearts heavy with pain and
anger because of what the Palestinian people, most of whom are children and older
persons, have been subjected to in the Gaza Strip, including killing, displacement,
siege, starvation and the deliberate destruction of everything. As for the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, our land is being looted, our properties and holy sites are being
desecrated and our rights are being violated through the crimes committed by the
occupation forces and settlers, without any accountability.
The occupation Government’s practices, measures and laws in the occupied
territories are illegitimate and are aimed at undermining the two-State solution,
weakening the official institutions of the State of Palestine, preventing the Palestinian
people from exercising their right to self-determination and the realization of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital. They
disregard the resolutions of international legitimacy adopted by the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and international tribunals, the
most recent of which is the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences arising from the policies and practices of Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem (see A/78/968), which calls
for an end to the illegal Israeli occupation, including an end to settlements.
We hope that the glimmer of hope, for which we have worked with our brothers
and friends over the past 15 months to reach a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, through
the commendable mediation efforts of Qatar, Egypt and the United States, will
hold and succeed, leading to a complete and permanent ceasefire, without a return
to aggression, the full withdrawal of the occupation forces from the Gaza Strip,
the establishment of a political process based on the resolutions of international
legitimacy leading to the end of the occupation and the implementation of the

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
6/41 25-01214
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, in accordance with the General
Assembly resolution calling for the end of the occupation within one year (General
Assembly resolution ES-10/24).
Since the first day of the aggression, the State of Palestine has worked tirelessly
to demand an immediate ceasefire to prevent the worsening of the humanitarian
situation and prevent displacement and land annexation and has repeatedly warned
about the danger of the occupation forces’ invasion of the Gaza Strip and called for
protecting civilians from the scourge of war and destruction, regardless of the parties
to the conflict. In that regard, we commend the positions of Egypt, Jordan and other
countries that have rejected any attempts to displace Palestinians from their country,
whether in Gaza or the West Bank. We also stressed the need to stop practices that
undermine the two-State solution, including the expansion of settlements and the
crimes perpetrated by the settlers in broad daylight. We have called for preserving
the historic and legal status quo of the Christian and Islamic holy sites in the occupied
city of Jerusalem.
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to all the countries and peoples
that supported our efforts to achieve a ceasefire, including among the members
of the Security Council and General Assembly, and all those who worked to stop
the genocidal war against our people and hold Israel accountable for its crimes,
including the States that supported us before international tribunals, in particular
South Africa, which referred the case to the International Court of Justice to bring
an end to the crimes of genocide against our people.
Since the first moment of this aggression, the State of Palestine has undertaken
intense diplomatic efforts, led by President Mahmoud Abbas, who has made hundreds
of calls and convened hundreds of meetings with regional and international parties
to end this bloody aggression and went several times to the Security Council with the
help of a number of Council members, led by Algeria, the Arab representative in the
Security Council, and to the resumed the emergency special session of the General
Assembly, demanding the implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2735 (2024). That resolution calls for an immediate ceasefire,
the release of hostages and prisoners, the delivery of urgent humanitarian assistance
to the Gaza Strip, the prevention of the displacement of Palestinians and the return of
displaced persons to their places of residence. It also calls for the withdrawal of the
occupation forces from the entire Gaza Strip, enabling the Palestinian Authority to
assume its full responsibilities in the Gaza Strip and reunite the Gaza Strip with the
West Bank under its Administration, and for a return to a political process that would
end the illegal occupation and lead to the independence of the State of Palestine
and the realization of the two-State solution, in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy.
In that context, we affirm that the Gaza Strip is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory and that the State of Palestine has legal and political jurisdiction
over the Gaza Strip and the entire Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We reiterate our total rejection of any attempts to annex our land
or displace our people, which constitute blatant violations of international law and
the principles enshrined by international legitimacy. We reaffirm the imperative
of adhering to our legitimate rights and national identity, which unite our people
everywhere in the world. That requires the unity of our land and our people under
the umbrella of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) — the only legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people — and everyone’s commitment to the PLO’s
political programme and international obligations and to working under one system,
one law and one legitimate army.
Accordingly, we affirm that the Palestinian Government is ready to assume
responsibility for the administration of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, in

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 7/41
cooperation with friendly and brotherly countries and organizations, including the
restoration of basic health and educational services, water and electricity, while
ensuring the return of the displaced to their homes and preparing for the reconstruction
phase. We are also committed to managing the crossings in cooperation with the
European Union and Egypt, in accordance with the Agreement on Movement and
Access of 2005. In that regard, we note that we welcome any assistance in the area of
training and equipping the Palestinian police and security forces. We look forward
to the assistance of brotherly and friendly States in all areas to lift the Gaza Strip
and its people out of the humanitarian disaster they are experiencing. We emphasize
here the importance of the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is indispensable and
irreplaceable. The Israeli occupation authorities have no right to prevent UNRWA
from exercising its duties to serve the Palestinian refugees in the occupied territory
and in all its areas of operations where our Palestinian refugees are present, in
particular given that the Agency was established and its mandate and tasks defined
by United Nations resolutions, and the Israeli occupation authority has no right to
disrupt or stop its work.
We would like to express our deep appreciation to the countries that have
supported our position and helped our people during this difficult time. We call on
the international community to provide further urgent humanitarian support and to
cooperate with the Palestinian Government to enhance its ability to fulfil its role
and shoulder its responsibilities. However, we emphasize the importance of finding
a lasting and comprehensive political solution to the Palestinian issue and peace in
the Middle East. We therefore commend the efforts of all countries participating in
the global alliance for peace, which was formed in September 2024 in New York
under the leadership of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the European Union and the
Kingdom of Norway.
We also commend the efforts of the Arab Islamic Committee, led by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, which has toured the world in order to mobilize efforts, stop the
aggression and implement the two-State solution in accordance with the resolutions
of international legitimacy. It has also sought to obtain international recognition for
the State of Palestine and its full membership in the United Nations, so as to bring an
end to the Israeli occupation and ensure the establishment of the independent State
of Palestine on the lines of the 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
solve the refugee problem in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
That will provide an opportunity to achieve peace and stability not only between
Palestinians and Israelis but for all countries of the region, so that they can live in
security, peace and good-neighbourliness. In that context, we look forward to the
convening of the international conference for the implementation of the resolutions
of international legitimacy related to the Palestinian issue and the two-State solution,
which will be held in June in New York. We call on all participating countries to take
practical and decisive steps to end the occupation, support the independence of the
State of Palestine and achieve a just peace.
Our people are struggling for a just and comprehensive peace that guarantees
security for all. We therefore reiterate our call before the Council to grant the
State of Palestine full membership in the United Nations and to adopt the Arab
Peace Plan presented in the statement by President Abbas in September 2024 to the
General Assembly and supported by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the countries
participating in the conference of the global alliance for peace. The Plan would allow
the State of Palestine to gain its independence on its territory occupied since 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and would allow everyone to live side by side in
peace, security and good-neighbourliness.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
8/41 25-01214
The President: The presidency of the Security Council gives the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Shapir Ben Naftaly (Israel): On 7 October 2023, Hamas perpetrated the
worst massacre against the Jewish people since the Holocaust. More than 1,200 lives
were brutally taken, and more than 250 people were abducted. Amid that darkness,
the unity and resilience of the Israeli people shines through. It is that unity that
has driven Israel’s determination to achieve the objectives of this war: bringing all
the hostages home, dismantling Hamas’ military and governing capabilities and
ensuring that Gaza will never again pose a threat to Israel.
For 472 days, hostages have been subjected to unimaginable suffering — among
them the three women released yesterday. Romi Gonen, aged 24, was abducted from
the Nova music festival after witnessing the murder of her best friend. Injured, she
was taken to Gaza, where she received practically no treatment for her severe wounds.
Emily Damari, a 28-year-old British Israeli, was taken from her kibbutz, Kfar Aza,
after a terrorist invaded the kibbutz and massacred her neighbours. In the last
message before her abduction, she wrote that terrorists were in her neighbourhood,
shooting near her apartment. Doron Steinbrecher, 31, a veterinary nurse, was also
kidnapped from kibbutz Kfar Aza after being trapped in her home. A video later
emerged showing her pale, thin and visibly suffering in captivity. Those women,
who endured unimaginable suffering, are heroes. They embody the strength and
resilience of the Israeli people, standing as eternal symbols of courage in the face of
inconceivable cruelty.
Yet even as we see the first hostages finally returning home, the joy of their return
is overshadowed by the immense pain that remains. Families have endured months of
psychological torture, forced to watch staged videos of their loved ones, broken and
afraid. Hamas has weaponized fear and grief as tools of control. Their propaganda
videos of hostages are calculated acts of terror. They serve as tools of psychological
warfare, amplifying fear and grief to deepen the suffering of the hostages, their loved
ones and the entirety of Israeli society. The suffering of our hostages has extended
beyond the psychological to include physical violence and abuse, the deprivation of
basic needs such as food and medical care and conditions that violate every norm and
concept of human decency. For the past 472 days, these innocent people have known
only misery, violence and torture at the hands of Hamas.
Hamas’ brutality has not stopped at kidnapping. It has extended to the execution
of hostages and all kinds of immeasurably cruel acts. We will never forget any of
the victims of those atrocities, and their memory will strengthen our fight to ensure
justice and security for all our people, among them Kfir Bibas, who just two days ago
celebrated his second birthday. Yet for that little boy, his brother Ariel, his parents,
Shiri and Yarden, still held in captivity, there have been no celebrations — just as
they were none for his first birthday — only captivity and suffering.
The Security Council must confront an uncomfortable truth: it called for the
release of those hostages, but those calls were ignored by Hamas. The Council
adopted resolutions and demanded their release, while Hamas — a terror group that
heeds no international norm or law — violated those resolutions without being held
accountable or paying any price. Yet it was Israel that was scrutinized in this very
Chamber while no measures were adopted against those who had kidnapped babies
and elderly persons. By failing to hold Hamas accountable, the Council has set a
dangerous precedent. That failure represents a profound lapse in judgment throughout
the international community. It signals to the world that terrorist organizations can
operate with impunity, exploiting innocent lives as bargaining chips without fear
of meaningful repercussions. That precedent emboldens not just Hamas but any
group that seeks to emulate its tactics. The global ramifications of that inaction are
staggering; it threatens the very foundations of international security and justice.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 9/41
Some of the consequences of that failure may be salvaged. Israel demands that the
Council take the most basic moral step to unequivocally condemn Hamas and to
finally designate it as the terrorist organization that it is.
It was Hamas that initiated the war with its brutal attack on 7 October 2023, and
its fellow Iranian proxies across the region followed suit, joining the attacks against
Israel. For the past 15 months, the Houthi terrorist regime, guided and funded by
Iran, launched hundreds of rockets and uncrewed aerial vehicle attacks against
Israeli population centres. On our northern border, 63,000 of our citizens were
forced to evacuate as a result of Hizbullah firing more than 22,000 rockets, missiles
and anti-tank munitions at their homes. We will continue to enforce the ceasefire
understandings with Lebanon and will respond to any violation. The State of Israel
maintains its right to act against any threat to its security.
With regard to the developments in Syria, Israel is taking all the necessary
steps to defend and ensure the security of the communities in the Golan Heights and
the entire civilian population. The State of Israel has no interest in a conflict with
Syria, and neither does it have it any intention of interfering in its internal affairs.
But we will not tolerate a situation that endangers our civilians and allows Iran to
re-establish itself in the region and transfer weapons to Hizbullah.
We now stand at a turning point for the entire region. Iran’s proxies have suffered
devastating losses. Through the bravery and determination of our soldiers, Israel has
not only weakened Hamas but also fundamentally altered the strategic landscape
of the Middle East. The Iranian regime’s network of terror — from Hizbullah in
Lebanon to the Houthis in Yemen — has faced significant setbacks, with capacities
diminished and positions isolated. Arch-terrorists such as Hassan Nasrallah,
Mohammed Deif, Yahya Sinwar and Ibrahim Aqil have been eliminated. Israel’s
actions have sent clear messages: the days when terror groups could operate with
impunity are over; the days when Iran could freely sow chaos and terror throughout
the Middle East are over
It is therefore clear that Israel’s decisive and necessary response to the 7 October
2023 massacre is what forced Hamas to the negotiating table. Without the courage
and sacrifices of our forces, the hostages would still be languishing in captivity
without any hope of freedom. That progress has come at a heavy cost. Israel has
agreed to release convicted terrorists, who are responsible for heinous crimes, to
bring our people home. That was a decision that no nation should have to make. Yet
we made it because we hold life sacred. The deal is not a conclusion: it is a step in the
demanding journey to ensure the return of every single hostage. Each decision that
we make reflects the profound moral weight of balancing justice with the imperative
to save lives. The hostage release deal reflects Israel’s unwavering resolve to meet
the war’s objectives. We are steadfast in our commitment to dismantling Hamas’
capabilities to ensure that Gaza is no longer a threat and to return every hostage to
their families.
We recognize and deeply appreciate the steadfast support of our allies, in
particular the United States. The principled leadership and unwavering backing of
both the Biden and the Trump Administration have been instrumental in navigating
these challenging times. The partnership represents the shared commitment to
combating terror and upholding the values of freedom and security. Their support is
a testament to the strength of alliances built on mutual respect and a common vision
for a safer world.
In conclusion, Hamas has turned Gaza into a fortress of terror, sacrificing
civilians to shield their operations. It has weaponized schools, mosques, hospitals
and United Nations facilities, transforming them into instruments of war. That
barbarity demands a resolute and united response from the international community.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
10/41 25-01214
Failing to act decisively against Hamas sends a dangerous message to other terrorist
organizations that such tactics are permissible. It is a test of our collective will to
uphold international law and human dignity. The families of the hostages and the
people of Israel know that this moment is only the beginning. The war will not end
until every hostage is returned and Hamas’ ability to terrorize is dismantled. We
will not rest until every one of them is back home. We will not stop until the threat
of Hamas is eliminated. And we will never forget the price that has been paid by
the innocent
The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs, National Community Abroad and African Affairs of Algeria.
(spoke in Arabic)
I express my deepest appreciation and praise to His Excellency the Secretary-
General for his valuable briefing and accurate analysis of the developments in the
Middle East, including with regard to the challenges that we must all address and
everything that the situation demands of us.
We attend today’s meeting with a sense of cautious optimism and apprehension,
a sense of anticipation and looking forward to bringing the war against Gaza to an
end, following the announcement of a ceasefire deal in the beleaguered Palestinian
territory. The deal was long awaited, as Israel pursued its project in Gaza and the
wider region. It was concluded despite the artificial obstacles that were contrived,
some overtly and others behind closed doors. It is a deal whose absence has long
frustrated the entire international community, which is pinning all its hopes on
it alleviating the injustice and suffering of the Palestinians, ending the stagnated
political process to specifically address the Palestinian cause and so as to bring
peace and restore stability to the Middle East in general.
We are grateful to the international mediators who worked tirelessly to broker the
deal after 15 months of a war whose catastrophic toll cannot be described in words
or numbers. Gaza is no longer Gaza in the aftermath of the crimes that claimed the
lives of more than 46,000 martyrs, most of whom were women and children. Gaza
is no longer Gaza in the aftermath of the massive destruction that it has witnessed
and that razed hospitals, shops, schools, universities and even mosques, churches,
shelters and graveyards to the ground. Gaza is no longer Gaza after demolishing
all its resources and infrastructure and eliminating its various social and economic
lifelines, in addition to impoverishing the people of Gaza and depriving them of the
most basic needs for a life of dignity and survival. And despite that disastrous toll,
the Palestinian people chose to emerge in Gaza and throughout the occupied territory
to celebrate the ceasefire and assert to the entire world that oppression did not and
will not hijack their will or undermine their determination, that injustice did not and
will not weaken their resilience or undermine their attachment to their land and that
oppression, no matter how brutal, did not and will not undermine their persistence to
restore their full national rights, in accordance with international legitimacy.
The ceasefire deal in Gaza represents precious hope for this proud people — hope
in life, hope in alleviating injustice and suffering and hope in controlling their
present and determining their destiny. Since the Council has been unable to provide
justice to the Palestinian people and ensure the realization of their rights, it is fitting
today for the Council not to miss this historical moment and opportunity to uphold
its full responsibility, entrusted to it in the Charter of the United Nations. That
responsibility is not limited to addressing the impact of the aggression suffered by
Gaza over the long previous months, but also includes ensuring that the heart of the
conflict is addressed and achieving the national Palestinian project.
The international community can no longer tolerate the ongoing situation in the
Middle East, which has lasted for nearly 80 years, with one tragedy followed by a

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 11/41
greater tragedy, and the Nakba followed by a worse and more bitter Nakba. Palestine’s
destiny cannot continue to endure hopes dashed immediately and prospects and
opportunities rapidly and regularly lost. Accordingly, we must realize and be fully
aware that the ceasefire deal is not an end but a beginning, that it is no more than an
opportunity, the success or failure of which will depend on how well we seize this
moment and build upon it. This deal is only a means that — we sincerely hope — will
deliver us to a greater and more noble goal: to definitively resolve the Palestinian
question and achieve a lasting, fair peace in the Middle East.
Accordingly, we call on the Security Council to focus its efforts during this
present period on three main levels.
First, it must strengthen the deal and monitor its implementation, in all its content
and dimensions and through all its phases. The interrelated processes emerging from
this deal require the Council to provide strong support for international mediation
as it monitors implementation of the full and permanent ceasefire and the lifting
of the restrictions imposed on relief efforts in order to complete the exchange of
prisoners and hostages and to achieve the full withdrawal of Israel’s occupying
forces from Gaza.
Secondly, the Council must guarantee that the next-day arrangements in Gaza
take into consideration the will of the Palestinian people, reflect their consensus
and protect the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people in order for the
Palestinians to achieve their goals on the ground. Gaza is not a land without an
owner or people. The future of the land must be determined by the Palestinians, first
and foremost, without foreign intervention that could deepen divisions among the
Palestinian people and move them further away from national reconciliation. In that
context, we emphasize the need for the next-day arrangements in Gaza to respect
the unity of the Palestinian people, the integrity of the territory upon which the
Palestinian State will be built and the unity of the destiny of the Palestinian people.
The arrangements must also afford great importance to the plans to reconstruct Gaza
and the need to accelerate those plans
Finally, on the third level, we must build upon the ceasefire deal in order to
revitalize a serious political process, under the auspices of the United Nations, in
order to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The ceasefire in Gaza will not be
comprehensive or final or permanent unless it is supported by a meaningful, visionary,
bold and sincere political process that prioritizes achieving a final settlement for the
Palestinian question that is in line with the two-State solution, which, more than ever
before, is agreed upon internationally.
On the basis of the requirements of those three levels, Algeria, under the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, and in line with its
traditional role and active contribution to all international efforts, will guarantee the
needs of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip as soon as the illegal blockade is
lifted through participating in relief efforts and providing support for the building
of field hospitals, as soon as circumstances allow, as well as through our continued
support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which suffered an injustice and false accusations and was threatened.
However, its raison d’être continues.
Secondly, we will support Palestinian reconciliation and national unity. That
reconciliation is necessary and must be achieved in order to guarantee an end to
division, whose greatest price was paid by the Palestinian people themselves.
Thirdly and finally, we must protect the two-State solution, which is enshrined
in international legitimacy , by maintaining the pillars of an independent sovereign
Palestinian State and enabling it to become a fully fledged Member of the United

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
12/41 25-01214
Nations, with global recognition at the international conference that will be held
later this year.
(spoke in English)
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Slovenia.
Ms. Fajon (Slovenia): I want to start by thanking you personally, Mr. President,
for the organization of this high-level debate and for the work of your country on the
Council. I also thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and his commitment.
The Middle East has been swept up in a windstorm of changes that will
undoubtably transform the region. All of us sitting here today must shoulder our
responsibilities and offer our support in navigating those changes. The stakes are
too high for inaction. After yesterday’s silencing of the guns and first exchange of
hostages and prisoners, we feel relief and a sense of hope that a different future is
possible for the Middle East. Slovenia warmly welcomes the ceasefire agreement
in Gaza. We urge all parties to uphold their commitments to this fragile truce. We
thank the mediators who have made that outcome possible. The Council must now
focus on ensuring that the ceasefire evolves into a pathway towards lasting peace,
built on trust, justice and reconciliation.
The world’s most challenging problems require a global response. I travelled to
New York directly from Kyiv. In the third year of the Russian aggression in Ukraine,
much of the world is holding back. Slovenia has always been vocal at this table when
it comes to unjustified wars, violations of international law or the Charter of the
United Nations and the suffering of civilians, including women and children.
After almost three years in office as a Foreign Minister, I have never hesitated
to criticize the brutal killing of civilians. I am proud that Slovenia recognized an
independent and sovereign Palestine. I trust we were on the right side of history.
People in Gaza deserve to live without bombs and guns. People in Israel deserve to
live in security. As members of the Council, it is our responsibility, indeed duty, to
work tirelessly towards a lasting and just peace in the Middle East, in Ukraine and
other conflicts around the world.
In another recent development in the Middle East, a new chapter is starting to be
written in Syria. The Council has a clear role in supporting an inclusive Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned political process, in line with the key principles of resolution 2254
(2015). We also have a renewed hope for a permanent ceasefire between Lebanon and
Israel, with the Council’s role as custodian of the framework under resolution 1701
(2006). Slovenia calls for strict adherence to that framework, while emphasizing the
importance of de-escalation along the Blue Line. I look forward to visiting Syria and
Lebanon in the very near future. Both countries are on the path to a more hopeful
future. We are ready to stand with them.
However, the Middle East will never truly turn a new page as long as the
suffering, the hatred and the fear persist. To end them, we need leadership for people,
leadership for peace and leadership for multilateralism.
First, we need leadership for people. The plight of civilians, particularly in Gaza,
which could amount to genocide, remains a heartbreaking reminder of the cost of
conflict. Civilians are protected by international humanitarian law, and under no
circumstances are they the legitimate targets of attacks. We reiterate the vulnerable
situation of children and women in this conflict, but today I also want to highlight
the suffering of those who are most often overlooked. Many of them lost their land
decades ago, and now they have lost their homes, the generations they created and

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 13/41
the dignity they held onto despite all the odds. After a life of hardship, older persons
in Gaza are facing the worst circumstances, with no food to put on the table and no
doctor to ease their pain. The plight of civilians, including older persons in Gaza, is
another broken promise of leaving no one behind. I sincerely hope that the ceasefire
in Gaza gives them a chance to finally experience peace. It is now time to give them
and the generations after them a chance to see a new Gaza, one that is rebuilt full of
hope, a Gaza that is reunified with the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, under
the Palestinian Authority. But first, the ceasefire must translate into safe, direct and
uninterrupted humanitarian access and an immense scaling up of aid.
Secondly, we need strong leadership for peace, in Gaza and in the region.
With vision and commitment, leadership for peace must uphold international law,
particularly international humanitarian law and human rights law. That requires
accountability for grave violations that have taken place, through appropriate legal
mechanisms. Peace cannot take root without accountability. Leadership for peace
must be built on dialogue, on cooperation and on the normalization of ties. It cannot
perpetuate or fuel proxy exchanges or further escalation. Unconstructive and divisive
rhetoric, provocations and incitement must become a relic of the past.
Thirdly, we need leadership for multilateralism. This Organization was built on
the premise that the path to peace cannot be walked alone. In the Council, we often
encounter obstacles, but the hard work of diplomacy in this Chamber never stops.
Slovenia remains convinced that the Security Council must also lay the groundwork
for the two-State solution. Equally, we underline the role the whole membership
should play in making peace in the region a truly lasting one, including through
an international peace conference under United Nations auspices. I restate our
willingness to host a meeting of the Global Alliance for the Implementation of the
Two-State Solution.
I thank the Secretary-General for his leadership in this crisis and for the work
of the United Nations system. That includes the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) — the irreplaceable
backbone of humanitarian action there. In the light of the responsibilities conferred
on all Member States through the Charter of the United Nations, I once again use
this opportunity to call on the Government of Israel not to implement the legislation
affecting UNRWA. In this moment of hope, it is time to find ways for cooperation
and to rebuild the lives of civilians in Palestine.
Leadership is never easy. The pursuit of long-lasting solutions involves a lot
of difficult decisions, sometimes with no short-term gains in sight. It is now time
to make those difficult decisions, placing peace as the collective interest of the
membership of this Organization. As we navigate these transformative times, let us
remember that peace is not an unattainable dream. It is within our reach, provided
we choose cooperation over conflict, justice over impunity and hope over despair.
At the beginning of the year, I assure the Council that Slovenia will not approach
conflicts on the basis of geography, but rather on that of principles. We will continue
believing in solving problems through dialogue rather than aggression, and we
believe in building trust and peace.
The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I congratulate Mr. Ahmed Attaf, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, National Community Abroad and African Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of Algeria, on Algeria’s presidency of the Security Council, and I thank
him for convening this high-level open debate at such a critical moment. I extend
my gratitude to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his
important briefing, and I commend his leadership and tireless efforts in addressing
the complex challenges arising from the escalation of the conflict in the Gaza Strip.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
14/41 25-01214
His commitment to advancing peace in the occupied Palestinian territory, Israel and
the broader Middle East region is deeply appreciated.
I would like to begin by expressing my deepest condolences to the families of
all victims, both Palestinian and Israeli, of the tragic violence that erupted since
7 October 2023. The scale of the violence, the immense loss of life and the suffering
endured by innocent civilians serve as a stark reminder of the urgent need for peace,
stability and the protection of human dignity. We also pay tribute to the service
and ultimate sacrifice of more than 350 United Nations and humanitarian workers
who have lost their lives in the Israel-Hamas conflict in the Gaza Strip. We stand in
solidarity with all humanitarian and front-line personnel.
For 15 months, the Security Council and the international community have
been focused on the ongoing conflict in the Gaza Strip, which has claimed more
than 46,000 civilian lives, including the lives of approximately 18,000 children.
Reports, including the 12 January 2025 situation report of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Secretary-
General’s response to General Assembly resolution ES-10/26, have exposed the
horrific realities faced by civilians in Gaza. The violence has been marked by
repeated violations of international law, including international humanitarian law.
Those violations are manifest in the collective punishment of the Palestinian people,
the indiscriminate and systemic attacks against civilians and civilian objects and
the denial of access to urgently needed humanitarian aid, which is essential for
preserving and protecting lives
The impact of the conflict has been disproportionately felt by women and
children. Many children who have survived are now orphaned, displaced or maimed,
with their education interrupted. Women have been stripped of their livelihoods,
privacy and dignity. In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that between 7 October 2023 and
8 January 2025, 816 Palestinians were killed, including 498 in 2024 alone. That
situation cannot continue. The international community must demonstrate a
collective commitment to ending the cycle of violence.
At this critical juncture in the conflict, with the promising prospect of achieving
a lasting ceasefire, the release of hostages, the unhindered delivery of humanitarian
aid to Gaza and the beginning of Gaza’s reconstruction, Sierra Leone would like to
emphasize three key points.
First, Sierra Leone welcomes the ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas. We
commend Egypt, Qatar and the United States for their mediation efforts, which have
led to a ceasefire, the release of hostages and an increase in humanitarian delivery in
Gaza. That is a positive step that must be fully leveraged by both parties in good faith
and with right intentions. Echoing the words of the Secretary-General, we call on all
relevant parties to uphold their commitments and ensure the full implementation of
the agreement. We encourage Israel and Hamas to comply fully with their obligations
under the ceasefire deal and to carry out their respective duties within the specified
timelines. We also welcome the release of three Israeli women hostages and 90
Palestinian prisoners as part of the ceasefire arrangement.
Secondly, we support the increase in humanitarian assistance to Gaza, as the
humanitarian situation remains utterly dire. The conflict has left more than 2 million
people in desperate need of food, medical supplies and shelter. As displaced
civilians return to their homes, they will require essential supplies to build their
lives. Humanitarian organizations, including the World Food Programme (WFP),
have emphasized the need for all border crossings to remain open and operational,
allowing aid to reach those in need. For efficient and effective aid delivery, the World
Food Programme has underscored the critical role of the United Nations Relief and

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 15/41
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in reaching all
those in need at this critical juncture. In collaboration with UNRWA, the WFP has
the capacity to provide life-saving food to at least 2 million people in Gaza over the
next three months. UNRWA remains the only organization with the logistical and
human resources to address the severe needs of Palestinian civilians in Gaza. In the
light of recent legislation enacted by the Israeli Government on 28 October 2024,
we urge the Government of Israel to comply with its international obligations and to
allow UNRWA to continue its vital work unhindered, delivering life-saving services
to millions of Palestinians.
Thirdly, the diplomatic momentum gained must be preserved and expanded to
facilitate future dialogue aimed at achieving a political settlement based on the two-
State solution. While the efforts to secure a ceasefire and the release of hostages
are important steps towards alleviating immediate suffering, they represent only a
fraction of the long-standing and unresolved issues at the heart of the Palestine-Israel
conflict. The situation remains fragile, and both Palestinians and Israelis continue
to live in fear and uncertainty. The events of the past 15 months remind us all of the
consequences of occupation and the elusive nature of peace in the Middle East. They
highlight that there is no viable alternative to a two-State solution, which will allow
for the establishment of a Palestinian State alongside the existing Jewish State, with
both States living side by side in peace, stability and security. That important work
must start with the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, which must be comprehensive,
addressing the infrastructural, economic, political and administrative conditions
necessary for establishing effective governance
On a broader regional scale, we acknowledge that, while the ceasefire agreement
between Israel and Hamas is just as crucial to reducing violence in Gaza, it also
holds a broader temporary reprieve for civilians and opens a window for diplomatic
efforts. All regional actors must seize this opportunity to work towards peaceful
solutions to address the underlying issues fuelling conflict in the region.
Sierra Leone continues to call on all parties to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law, while ensuring the protection of civilians, the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid and the prevention of further violence.
We emphasize the importance of accountability for violations of international law,
including international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Finally, Sierra Leone reaffirms its commitment to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, based on the principles of international law and respect for
the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination. We remain firmly supportive of
the two-State solution, which is the only viable framework for resolving this conflict
and ensuring the security and sovereignty of both Israel and Palestine.
The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Mr. Fiqi (Somalia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express
my sincere thanks to the brotherly People’s Republic of Algeria for holding this
important meeting and to congratulate it on its assumption of the presidency for this
month. This meeting reflects a deep awareness of the gravity of the humanitarian
and political situation in the Gaza Strip and a deep awareness in general of the
Palestinian cause. I also thank the Secretary-General for his informative briefing,
which painted a detailed picture of the scale of suffering, the challenges faced by the
Palestinian people today and developments in Lebanon and Syria.
Over the past 15 recent months, we have witnessed a tragic escalation in the Gaza
Strip that has left thousands of innocent civilians dead, destroyed vital infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, and turned the daily lives of Gaza residents into
constant, unbearable suffering. That painful reality places us all in front of a moral,
humanitarian and political responsibility that calls for urgent and comprehensive

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
16/41 25-01214
international action to end the suffering of the defenceless Palestinian people and
ensure respect for their fundamental and inalienable rights.
The announcement of the ceasefire agreement, which was the outcome of tireless
efforts undertaken by the brotherly State of Qatar and the brotherly Arab Republic of
Egypt, in cooperation with the friendly United States of America, is important and
welcome. The agreement highlights the importance of diplomatic action in resolving
conflicts and reflects what can be achieved through political will and constructive
cooperation. However, the agreement must be seen as the first step in a long and
arduous process to achieve a lasting and comprehensive peace.
Yesterday and today we have witnessed emotional scenes where signs of joy and
relief were evident on faces of the peoples of Palestine, especially in the Gaza Strip,
and of Israel, following the entry into force of the ceasefire agreement, moments that
brought together families that had been separated for more than 15 months, where
they were able for the first time to hug their loved ones who had been detained by
Hamas or in Israeli prisons. Those images, full of human emotion, clearly confirmed
to us to what extent peace is vital as guns were silenced to give space for hope
and reconciliation. We welcome the agreement, which was not just a truce but a
glimpse of hope towards a better future. From the bottom of our hearts, we express
our hope that it will be built upon, making this moment a starting point towards
establishing a comprehensive and lasting peace that heals the wounds of the past,
restores confidence and trust and gives the people of the region a real chance to live
in dignity, security and prosperity.
The greatest challenge we face today is not only that of establishing a ceasefire,
but also how to address the root causes of the conflict, foremost of which is ending
the occupation, lifting the blockade on the Gaza Strip and ensuring the rebuilding of
Gaza to restore the hope of its residents. Rebuilding is not just a physical process of
repairing what was destroyed by the war, but a comprehensive process that requires
investing in people, supporting local communities and strengthening economic and
social infrastructure to ensure a more just and stable future.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza imposes on us a collective
responsibility to ensure the urgent, secure and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the Gaza Strip. In that context, we stress the importance of continuing
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East(UNRWA), which represents a lifeline for millions of Palestinian
refugees. UNRWA’s mandate, established by General Assembly resolution 302 (IV),
is not a matter that can be amended except by a decision of the Assembly. Therefore,
we call on all parties to avoid taking any steps that might affect the Agency or
exacerbate the humanitarian situation on the ground.
Building real peace requires more than just a cessation of hostilities; it
requires collective will to find sustainable solutions. In that connection, we call
for the establishment of an effective international mechanism to ensure the
full implementation of ceasefire agreements and prevent a return to the cycle of
violence. We also emphasize the importance of supporting the legitimate Palestinian
leadership and strengthening Palestinian national institutions to enable them to play
their role in responding to the aspirations of the Palestinian people for freedom
and independence
In conclusion, the establishment of peace and stability in the Middle East
requires a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, based on the resolutions
of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, which guarantees the
realization of the vision of two States and the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 17/41
The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian people and calls on the international community to redouble
its efforts to end the Israeli occupation and achieve a just, comprehensive and
sustainable peace that guarantees the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and
restores dignity and stability for the region as a whole.
Mr. Ruiz-Hernández (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Panama respectfully
welcomes the delegation of the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, headed
by His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Attaf. We also extend our appreciation to Secretary-
General António Guterres for his valuable briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
The date 7 October 2023 marked a dark chapter in contemporary history. The
terrorist attack perpetrated by Hamas, which took the lives of 1,200 Israeli civilians,
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and the basic principles of
humanity. Panama unreservedly condemns those cowardly acts, which perpetuate
cycles of hatred and destruction.
We underscore that the people of Israel have the inalienable right to live in
security within recognized borders. However, the legitimate but devastating military
response that has followed has plunged the region into a humanitarian tragedy of
historic proportions. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, more than 46,000 lives, including 18,000 children, have been cut short.
Those figures are a heartbreaking cry that demands immediate action. We cannot
ignore the humanitarian catastrophe that is plaguing millions. Panama welcomes the
recent ceasefire agreement as a beacon of hope amid the suffering. We recognize
the diplomatic efforts led by Egypt, the United States and Qatar in mediating the
agreement, which offers vital respite for both sides. However, we know that the
cessation of hostilities is not an end in itself — it must be the starting point towards
a comprehensive and lasting political commitment.
In our capacity as a non-permanent member of the Council, we reiterate that
respect for international law, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
is non-negotiable. From resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) to the two-State
consensus, the Council has charted the path to peace. The coexistence of Israel
and Palestine, based on secure and recognized borders, remains the only possible
horizon. We call for the roots of the conflict to be addressed. Recognizing Israel’s
right to exist in security is as essential as ensuring the implementation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention in the Palestinian territory.
We also unequivocally condemn Hamas — a terrorist organization that has
instrumentalized the suffering of the Palestinian people to advance its agenda of
violence, which constitute cowardly acts that do not reflect the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian population. Without security for Israel, peace will be unattainable.
However, without justice and dignity for the Palestinians, stability will be illusory.
Regarding the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, Panama recognizes its vital role in the provision of essential services
to Palestinian refugees. Despite the challenges and controversies, we reiterate our
support for the Agency, which represents a pillar of hope for millions. The heroism
of its humanitarian workers must not be tarnished by those who, from the shadows,
exploit humanitarian structures for vile purposes.
History has taught us that military solutions cannot guarantee peace. The ceasefire
must become a platform for inclusive political dialogue, backed by the international
community. Panama urges all parties to act with restraint and responsibility, while
prioritizing a solution that promotes dignity and mutual respect. Panama reaffirms
its commitment to the resolutions of the Council and to the construction of a peace
that transcends differences — a peace that not only puts an end to the conflict but

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
18/41 25-01214
also inaugurates an era of peaceful coexistence and shared prosperity for the entire
region. Peace is not a remote ideal but an immediate right. May the Council act
courageously, guided by humanity, to sow the seeds of a more hopeful future for
Israelis and Palestinians alike.
Mr. Falconer (United Kingdom): I am grateful to the delegation of Algeria for
convening today’s important meeting.
The ceasefire agreement offers hope for the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and
for the world. I too would like to thank Egypt, Qatar and the United States for their
tireless efforts to achieve it. The hostages have endured unimaginable suffering at
the hands of Hamas since they were so cruelly taken on 7 October 2023. I welcome
the release of three of them, including dual British national, Emily Damari, bringing
their horrific ordeal to an end. The remaining phases of the ceasefire must now be
implemented in full and on schedule, including the release of all remaining hostages.
Civilians in Gaza are enduring suffering that almost defies belief. More than
46,000 Palestinians have been killed, including many children. Winter has only
worsened the dire situation, with children dying from hypothermia and the imminent
risk of famine in northern Gaza. This deal opens the way for them to begin to rebuild
their lives. The United Kingdom and our partners have been pressing at every
opportunity for an immediate ceasefire and the release of the hostages. The Foreign
Secretary did so last week during his visit to Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories. Those intense diplomatic efforts must continue in the days and weeks
ahead. We must build confidence on all sides to help to sustain the ceasefire, progress
through all its phases and turn it into a lasting peace that assures the security of
Israelis and Palestinians alike. The United Kingdom will focus all our efforts on
keeping up that momentum, until every hostage is released, the aid promised to Gaza
reaches those in need and Palestinians are free to return to their homes and to rebuild
their lives. It is essential that the surge of assistance be properly coordinated, with
the right level of access and security to reach those in need. As the Foreign Secretary
has said, Israeli legislation means that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) faces a cliff edge in its ability to
support Palestinian refugees across the West Bank and in Gaza. We urge Israel to
refrain from endangering UNRWA’s ability to operate.
This agreement is a crucial first step towards a sustainable peace and a credible
pathway to a two-State solution. Millions of people are relying on us to build on this
process and end their agony. We must not let them down.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): Calls for peace in the Middle East have been far too many
in the Chamber, and they have been repeated far too many times in its history.
My country, Greece, warmly welcomes the long-awaited ceasefire and hostage
release agreement. As fragile as it may seem, it might be a turning point for
establishing enduring stability in the region. It is now time to fully deliver on the
deal so that all Israeli hostages finally rejoin their loved ones and the Palestinian
people finally stop counting their dead.
Words fail to convey the accumulated pain and suffering endured by the people in
this turbulent region — one very close to home. Words are insufficient to convey the
horror experienced by Israeli families having lost loved ones to the terror of Hamas
or that of innocent civilians, including thousands of children, who have lost their
lives in Gaza. It is finally time to silence the guns and for peace to prevail. Yesterday
we were overjoyed that three female hostages — Romi Gonen, Doron Steinbrecher
and Emily Damari — finally joined their families in Israel after being held captive
by Hamas terrorists since 7 October 2023. It is now key to ensure that negotiations on
the next phases succeed. It is time to accelerate discussions to advance post-conflict
planning for the governance and security of Gaza for the longer-term to secure a safe

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 19/41
and prosperous future for the Palestinians and all the people in the region. Inspired
by the heritage of a region that is the birthplace of so many of the world’s religions,
we are believers in the prospect of a two-State solution, of Israelis and Palestinians
living side by side in peace and security. We are believers in the positive culmination
of the peace process, which remains on our collective horizon, as a beacon at the far
end of a long, dark tunnel, hanging by a thread, unless our collective voice strives to
keep it alive, for alive it must stay.
The past few weeks have allowed for hope on the region’s horizon. The guns
seem to be widely silenced along the Lebanese-Israeli border, and Lebanon has
overcome its political impasse, having elected a new President and soon, it appears,
with a Government with a mandate to bring about positive change. The culmination
of those positive developments seems to have led us back to the core of the region’s
turmoil, to Gaza and the Palestinian question, where the long and commendable
mediation efforts of the United States, Egypt and Qatar have finally been successful.
We thank them for their tireless efforts, agreeing with the outgoing President of the
United States, who said citing the Bible “blessed be the peacemakers”. For while
it may require strength to preserve a conflict, it will take tremendous courage to
transcend it. Let the destructive cycle of violence finally end, let tensions cool and
let us turn to the day hereafter, to reconstruction, reconciliation and the creative
activities of peacetime.
We should be hopeful but not naive. We should remain cautious of the
difficulties on the ground. This fragile agreement must hold, and we call on all
sides to do their part to uphold it. The humanitarian situation on the ground is most
concerning. In that context, the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is irreplaceable. As highlighted
by the Secretary-General’s recent letter (S/2024/892), there is no alternative to its
accumulated experience of providing a wide spectrum of valuable, essential services
to Palestinians for over 75 years. Obstructing the Agency’s capacity to operate
within its mandate is not helpful at this stage and could even be detrimental. Its role
will be indispensable for implementing the humanitarian aspects of the agreement.
It is therefore crucial that the recommendations of the Colonna report be diligently
and fully implemented. That could even be a catalyst in terms of the much-needed
cooperation between the Agency and Israel.
Greek support to UNRWA has not ceased. Likewise, Greece is committed to
supporting humanitarian initiatives, such as the Cypriot Amalthea plan, which has
recently allowed for the provision of more than 1,000 tons of humanitarian aid to
Gaza through the port of Ashdod to alleviate some of the pain and to save some of the
lives, for, as it is stated in the Talmud, whoever saves one life, saves the world entire.
Consistent with its long-established relations with the Palestinians and the Arab
world and being a strategic ally of Israel, Greece will do its utmost as a bridge-builder
during its tenure at the Council. What we have witnessed since Hamas unleashed its
terror on 7 October 2023 has been a tragedy. May it be the end of the tragedy. May
we see the release of all hostages and the ceasefire preserved. May it evolve into
long-term peace. And may we see the peace process revived with a view to a viable
two-State solution.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to see you, Mr. Foreign Minister, presiding
over this important meeting of the Security Council. Pakistan congratulates you
on Algeria’s successful presidency and for convening and participating in this
timely debate on the grave situation in the Middle East, especially in Palestine. We
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his insightful briefing and his
wise recommendations.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
20/41 25-01214
Over the past 15 months, we have witnessed widespread destruction and
massive human suffering caused by Israel’s wanton attacks in Gaza, killing more
than 46,000 persons, mostly women and children. We have witnessed the most
egregious violations of international law, including international humanitarian law,
which many have concluded amount to genocide. Israel’s war has spread to the West
Bank, Lebanon, Syria, Iran and Yemen.
The wreckage caused in the Middle East is the consequence of Israel’s expansive,
illegal and unacceptable conception of its so-called right to self-defence. It is also
the consequence of the impunity that Israel has enjoyed in conducting attacks and
aggression that are lacking in any legal and moral proportionality, against the helpless
Palestinians, whose territory it occupies in flagrant violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. After defying the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly, the injunctions of the International
Court of Justice and the appeals of its friends and patrons, Israel has finally agreed
to a ceasefire arrangement on account of a particular deadline. That ceasefire could
have been achieved many months ago and could have saved thousands of lives, in
particular in Gaza.
We have all welcomed the announcement of the ceasefire. Pakistan appreciates
the patient mediatory efforts that have been made by Qatar, Egypt and the United
States to achieve the agreement on a cessation of hostilities in Gaza. In particular,
we extend our admiration to His Excellency Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman
bin Jassim Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, for
the resilience and diplomatic skill with which he steered the parties towards the
conclusion of the agreement. Pakistan hopes that all stages of the ceasefire agreement
will be fully implemented and that the ceasefire will become permanent. We are
concerned by Israel’s threats to resume its military attacks in Gaza. We also hope
that the Palestinians will be able to agree on arrangements for Gaza’s inclusive and
effective governance
First, the international community must now urgently address the humanitarian
crisis created by Israel’s destruction and blockade of Gaza and its deliberate strategy
of starving its population. All crossing points must be opened, and all United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies must be allowed to provide humanitarian
sustenance to the besieged, displaced and suffering Palestinians in Gaza. Israel’s
attempts to shut down the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the agency which provides a critical lifeline
to the Palestinians, must be vigorously opposed by the Security Council and the
international community. Pakistan will do all it can to assist the besieged and
suffering Palestinians in Gaza.
Secondly, the displaced Palestinians must be helped to return to their homes,
including in north Gaza, and to restore their devastated lives.
Thirdly, Israel must be obliged to withdraw its forces from Gaza, as envisaged
in the ceasefire agreement. Its presence is illegal and must be ended to ensure the
restoration of peace in Gaza, the rehabilitation of its displaced people and the prompt
reconstruction of Gaza.
Fourthly, the international community should assist the Palestinians to develop a
concrete plan for Gaza’s reconstruction as envisaged in resolution 2735 (2024), which
was initiated by the United States. The plan should be implemented expeditiously
with adequate international support.
Fifthly, and most importantly, the international community, including the
Security Council, must work to restore international legitimacy and sustainable peace
in Palestine and the wider Middle East. Accountability for the crimes committed in
the brutal war must be an essential element in restoring international legitimacy.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 21/41
The most critical step in building sustainable peace is the revival of the political
and diplomatic process to achieve a two-State solution between Israel and the
Palestinian people. That must be based on two fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, endorsed by several resolutions of the Security Council and
the international Court of Justice, namely, the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and the non-acquisition of territory through the use of force. Despite
the expansionist ambitions of some Israeli politicians, despite the devastation and
destruction wrought by Israel’s war machine and despite the scepticism of some
intellectuals, the two-State solution remains the most promising, equitable and, we
believe, feasible framework for durable peace among Israel, the Palestinians and the
Arab and Muslim world. Indeed, Israel’s existence, flowing from General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), can be legitimized only if there exists a separate and sovereign
Palestinian State. The alternative is prolonged and brutal military occupation,
revived violent resistance and perpetual conflict in the Holy Land, which would
continue to afflict the entire Middle East and poison the relations between Israel and
the Arab and Muslim world.
An inclusive political process is essential to advance the realization of the two-
State solution. Pakistan will work to promote such a solution as a member of the
Global Alliance for the Implementation of the Two-State Solution. This outcome
should be made politically inevitable. The State of Palestine must be recognized by all
United Nations Member States and admitted as a full member of the United Nations.
In that context, we welcome the General Assembly’s decision, in resolution 79/81, to
convene a high-level international conference in June 2025 on the implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions pertaining to the two-State solution.
To achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East, it is also essential to
simultaneously address other threats to peace and security in the region, as the
Secretary-General mentioned.
Pakistan welcomes the agreement, facilitated by France and the United States,
for a cessation of hostilities in Lebanon. We congratulate President Joesph Aoun on
his election and Mr. Nawaf Salam on his designation as Prime Minister of Lebanon.
Israeli forces must withdraw from south Lebanon within the stipulated 60 days. The
Lebanese army is ready to deploy there in accordance with resolution 1701 (2006).
Israel must halt its continuing attacks on Lebanon, which are blatant violations of the
26 November agreement.
Pakistan supports the stabilization of Syria through an inclusive political process
and governance. Terrorism must not be allowed to re-emerge in or from Syria. We
must uphold Syria’s unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Israel must withdraw
immediately from the separation zone established under the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces. It must also withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981).
We call for a halt to the Israeli and other air strikes against Yemen, as well as an
end to the attacks from Yemen on international shipping. We hope that a ceasefire
in Gaza will help to end these attacks and revive the interrupted political process
in Yemen.
The Council must also be concerned about the reported contemplation of further
Israeli attacks against the Islamic Republic of Iran. Today, despite the hostile
rhetoric, there is an opportunity to revive the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on equitable terms. This window of opportunity must not be missed, as such a move
would contribute significantly to realizing durable peace and security across the
entire Middle East

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
22/41 25-01214
The Israeli Prime Minister has proclaimed that Israel “has changed the face
of the Middle East”. But Israel has not — and cannot — change its soul, which
continues to seek justice and peace. Even in this altered strategic landscape, the
Arab and Muslim peoples will not relent in their quest for peace with justice and for
equal rights for the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination
and statehood
Ms. Lassen (Denmark): I thank Algeria for calling for this important and very
timely meeting.
The Middle East stands at a crossroads, undergoing a profound transformation
that will reshape its future for years to come. After endless months of brutal war,
we now have a long-awaited ceasefire and hostage agreement between Israel and
Hamas. Hostages, who have languished in Hamas captivity for over 15 gruelling
months, will finally return to their families, and we are relieved that the first three
female hostages were freed last night. The Israeli people can slowly begin to heal the
deep scars of Hamas’ horrific terrorist attack on 7 October.
At the same time, after more than 15 months of unimaginable suffering in
Gaza, the ceasefire should pave the way for an immediate scale-up of humanitarian
operations so that basic life-saving aid reaches the civilian population, so that
infrastructure is rehabilitated and materials for basic shelters are provided to the
many displaced people who lost their homes during the war. The ceasefire will
finally silence the guns. The ceasefire, we hope, will lead to a durable and lasting
peace and lay the foundation for the steps towards a two-State solution. We thank
the United States, Egypt and Qatar for their tireless efforts in negotiating this deal.
Elsewhere in the region, we witnessed the fall of the Al-Assad regime in Syria.
We welcomed a ceasefire in Lebanon. We congratulated Lebanon on the election of
a new President and the designation of a new Prime Minister. Those developments
give cause for hope
That was also the impression of Danish Foreign Minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen,
when he visited Israel, the occupied Palestinian territories, Jordan and Lebanon last
week. In his talks with the region’s leaders, he felt a cautious optimism that positive
shifts are happening. Put simply, these changes offer a rare opportunity to lay the
foundations for a just peace and a stable region — a peace that this region has been
yearning for over decades and so strongly deserves.
This is no time to hesitate. We must take full and immediate advantage of the
ceasefire, dramatically scale up humanitarian assistance and support the resumption
of basic services across Gaza. All parties must ensure that aid is allowed to move
into and within Gaza freely.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) continues to play a truly crucial role in that regard. There is no
alternative to this United Nations Agency, on which other humanitarian organizations
rely for its infrastructure, staff, common services and last-mile support. UNRWA
must be allowed to carry out its full mandate in all areas.
International law and core humanitarian principles make it perfectly clear — as
an occupying Power, Israel has an obligation to ensure that Palestinians receive
basic services. We urge the Israeli Government to abide by these obligations
and immediately and without delay ensure the facilitation of full, rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian assistance into and throughout the entire Gaza Strip.
We must not lose sight of the worrisome developments in the West Bank.
Denmark is deeply concerned about the latest increase in violence and reiterates that
the expansion of settlements, in clear violation of international law, undermines the
prospects for a two-State solution.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 23/41
In conclusion, it is high time to lay the foundations for peace. Now is the time to
commit to lasting peace through a two-State solution through which Palestinians and
Israelis alike can live in peaceful coexistence and mutual recognition. Now is the
time to support peace in Lebanon in all ways possible and benefit from the new dawn
rising, as the Secretary-General stated. Now is the time to support the people of
Syria rebuilding their country in a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and inclusive manner.
Now is the time for a just and brighter future with freedom and dignity.
We must match the enormity of this moment with ambition and action and
make good on the promise of the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The peoples of the Middle East deserve it.
Mr. Fu Cong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank the Algerian presidency for
convening today’s high-level open debate and welcome Foreign Minister Ahmed
Attaf, who is presiding over the proceedings. I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing.
Yesterday a ceasefire in Gaza materialized, which China welcomes. We look
forward to this pivotal moment being leveraged to put the Middle East on the right
track towards de-escalation. This ceasefire is overdue and has come too late. For 15
months, Gaza was subjected to sustained, wanton and indiscriminate shelling and
bombing, leaving a trail of over 46,000 deaths and 2 million people languishing in a
humanitarian catastrophe and plunging the wider region into turmoil. This ceasefire
is but the first step, and it is incumbent upon the international community to work
harder on the following important tasks, without which bloodshed and death will not
cease and there will be no prospect for peace between Palestine and Israel, or shared
stability in the wider region,
First, a permanent ceasefire in Gaza must be achieved.
Secondly, the humanitarian plight in Gaza must be alleviated.
Thirdly, arrangements must be made for post-conflict governance in Gaza.
Fourthly, the political prospects of the two-State solution must be revived.
Concerning the achievement of a permanent ceasefire in Gaza, once a ceasefire
is in place, no conflict should be allowed to restart. We note Israel’s statement that,
should phase-two talks collapse, it may resume military operations in Gaza, with
the backing of a certain country. We admit that we find that deeply concerning.
The current ceasefire ought to be the foundation for a permanent one. It must not
turn out to be only a pause before a new offensive. The three-phase deal should be
implemented continuously and comprehensively. We hope that the United States, as
the guarantor, will ensure that through tangible action.
With regard to alleviating the humanitarian plight in Gaza, the catastrophic
humanitarian conditions there are beyond imagination. The suffering of the
Palestinian people must be eased without delay. Israel, as the occupying Power, must
fulfil its obligations under international humanitarian law, lift all restrictions on
humanitarian access, ensure the secure and orderly distribution of humanitarian
supplies in Gaza at scale and ensure that displaced persons can return home safely.
There is no substitute for, or alternative to, the role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in humanitarian
operations in Gaza. Deeply concerned by the Israeli legislation against UNRWA, we
call on Israel not to go ahead with its implementation and to revoke those laws as
soon as possible.
Concerning the mechanisms and arrangements for post-conflict governance in
Gaza, the Strip is an inalienable part of the State of Palestine. Arrangements for
post-conflict Gaza should be decided inside Palestine, through consultation. The

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
24/41 25-01214
international community should help the intra-Palestinian groups to close ranks
in order to support the unified and effective management of Gaza and the West
Bank, under the leadership of the Palestinian Authority. Any attempt to change the
demographics and territory of Gaza is unacceptable. After 15 months of unbridled
and indiscriminate bombing and shelling, Gaza is the epitome of devastation. It is
uninhabitable. Reconstruction must start as soon as possible to give its people some
way of returning to their lives. International support for rebuilding Gaza is essential,
and UNRWA should be able to play its crucial role in the process.
As far as reviving the political prospects for the two-State solution is concerned,
while independent statehood for the Jewish people was long ago achieved, the
Palestinian people continue to be treated with indifference and to suffer from
historical injustice. The 15-month-long conflict has also proved once again that
lasting peace in the Middle East is possible only through the implementation of the
two-State solution, in which the two States, Palestine and Israel, live side by side
in peace. The international community should work towards relaunching the two-
State solution with the greatest sense of urgency and provide strong support and
assurances to that end. China welcomes the efforts of Saudi Arabia, the European
Union, Norway and others to revive the two-State solution and supports the holding
of a larger, more authoritative and more productive international peace conference to
work out a timetable and road map for the implementation of the two-State solution.
It is worth noting that Israel’s prolonged occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including settlement activities and settler violence in the West Bank, is
more than a violation of international law and Security Council resolutions. It also
erodes the foundations of the two-State solution. Even more dangerous are the
attempts to annex the West Bank, which would bury every last prospect for peace in
the Middle East.
To uphold the primacy of international law and to preserve the basic conditions for
independent Palestinian statehood, we call on the international community to take
all measures necessary to put an end to unilateral actions that violate international
law.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the ceasefire, belated as it already is, must
not turn out to be a mere hiatus before a fresh round of conflict. The international
community must intensify its coordinated efforts without delay in order to facilitate
the relaunching of the political process for the implementation of the two-State
solution. China always stands ready to maintain its constructive contributions and
tireless efforts to restore peace in the Middle East and to bring about a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Algeria for convening this timely debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his comprehensive
briefing, and indeed for his leadership and strident advocacy for peace in the Middle
East.
We are at a critical crossroads for both the Israeli and Palestinian people, and
for the Middle East as a whole. The war in Gaza has been at the centre of the violent
turbulence in the region since 7 October 2023. With the first phase of the recently
agreed ceasefire taking hold, hope is at an all-time high across the world, and
among the Palestinian people in particular.
Allow me to thank the Governments of Egypt, Qatar and the United States for
their tireless efforts. We call on the parties to fulfil their commitments under the
ceasefire agreement, while prioritizing the well-being of civilians. Guyana urges
the parties to continue negotiations between them in good faith in order to progress
towards a permanent end to the war in Gaza and the release of all hostages.
The people of Gaza simply cannot afford another day of war. They must be
guaranteed the space, time and resources to reconstruct their lives. Guyana therefore

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 25/41
urges the Council and all Member States to ensure that hostilities do not resume
in Gaza. We must also take all steps to ensure full compliance with the orders of
provisional measures issued by the International Court of Justice in 2024, and with
the Court’s advisory opinion regarding Israel’s continued presence in the occupied
Palestinian territory (see A/78/968).
In the immediate days ahead, the focus must continue to be on ramping up
the supply of critical humanitarian assistance to people in the Gaza Strip, while
providing food and critical healthcare services to those in dire need and addressing
the situation of the hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who have been displaced
from their homes. Children must be returned to the classroom, having endured more
than a year of learning loss. International solidarity and support are as critical now as
they have been throughout this war, and Guyana urges all Member States to scale up
the level of their support for recovery efforts in Gaza. It is also crucial for the United
Nations and aid agencies to be able to carry out their work without impediment.
As the tide shifts in Gaza with the implementation of this first phase of the
ceasefire deal, the tide is also shifting for Palestinians on another front. The
legislation adopted by the Israeli Knesset on 28 October 2024 on the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is set to
enter into force in a few days. Should Israel proceed with enforcing the legislation,
that would collide with the space that the ceasefire deal has created for scaling up
humanitarian assistance to Gaza. As the Secretary-General has asserted, while a
number of United Nations entities other than UNRWA have been operating and will
continue to operate in the occupied Palestinian territories, those entities cannot
replace UNRWA’s operations. The extent of UNRWA’s operations over its more than
70 years cannot be replicated by any other agency.
Guyana wishes to recall that UNRWA’s operations were intended to be temporary.
However, after more than seven decades, the impediments to Palestinian statehood
have not been removed, preventing a duly elected Government from assuming its
role and ensuring the proper functioning of the State and its institutions. Guyana
therefore urges the Council and all Member States to safeguard UNRWA’s role in the
occupied Palestinian territories until the Palestine refugee question is definitively
addressed, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions. We further
urge Israel to refrain from implementing the legislation, as doing so would hinder the
work of the United Nations, especially at this critical time for Palestinians in Gaza.
We must continue to work towards a permanent settlement of the Palestinian
question, in line with the two-State solution. The Palestinian people should not be
made to endure further cycles of violence, as we have seen since 7 October. Close
to 47,000 Palestinians, the majority of them women and children, have lost their
lives in this war. Many more have lost their homes and their livelihoods, and Gaza
now has the largest number of child amputees in modern history. Images of the
destruction in the Gaza Strip show endless grey heaps, with more than 90 per cent
of buildings estimated to have been destroyed or damaged. Palestinians must now
rebuild once again, and the support of the international community will be critical.
Notwithstanding the enormity of what is before us, there is no time like the present
for the United Nations to secure a lasting and just solution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We must seize the moment and end this conflict and the suffering of
generations of Palestinians. It is a question of self-determination and justice for the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, freedom for the Palestinian people in an independent State of
their own and a secured Israel are not elusive. As we meet today, amid glimmering
hope and cautious optimism, Guyana believes that the ceasefire agreement could be
the first step towards advancing those twin endeavours, forging a lasting peace for

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
26/41 25-01214
the people of Palestine and Israel and the wider Middle East. As a Member of the
United Nations and of the Council, we stand ready to do our part.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The whole world is witnessing a pivotal transition in the Middle East. Finally,
the dawn of hope has arrived in Gaza, with the release of three Israeli hostages
yesterday. We wholeheartedly welcome the long-awaited agreement to secure a
ceasefire and the release of hostages. We appreciate the persistent efforts by the
mediating countries, namely, the United States, Qatar and Egypt. Syria is charting
a new political path with the fall of the Al-Assad regime, after 14 years of civil war.
Lebanon overcame its political vacuum by electing a new President, following the
cessation of hostilities across the Blue Line.
However, alongside that optimism, we now stand at the most critical juncture.
There remain numerous unresolved key issues and deeply rooted challenges. I would
like to stress the following points today.
First, the Gaza ceasefire agreement must be faithfully implemented by all parties.
Hamas must release the hostages. Israel should withdraw from populated areas. Both
parties must cease all military operations in Gaza. We urge both parties to fully
commit to maintaining the negotiations in order to transition to the next phase of
the deal. Policymakers in Israel should reject any pressure to prolong or resume the
armed conflict. And Hamas must keep in mind, throughout the negotiating process,
that their terrorist attacks on 7 October 2023 cannot be justified under any pretext.
Secondly, there should be no hindrance to humanitarian aid flowing throughout
Gaza. Parties to the conflict must facilitate the entry and delivery of assistance.
All crossings into Gaza should be opened, and measures necessary to restore law
and order must be implemented. In that vein, we reiterate that Israel’s obligations
under international humanitarian law, as explained in the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice in July 2024 (see A/78/968), do not end at the border
crossings. It is Israel’s legal obligation to meet the basic needs of civilians in Gaza
and to facilitate humanitarian aid by third parties.
The operations of all humanitarian actors must be ensured and facilitated,
considering article 59 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. We recognize that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
has been playing a vital role in delivering humanitarian aid and providing social
services in Gaza. In that connection, we hope that the unilateral implementation of
national legislation of Israel will not jeopardize this historic opportunity to improve
the situation in Gaza.
Thirdly, this pressing momentum should rekindle the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. The Middle East peace process, stalled for decades, needs to be
resuscitated to promote long-term peaceful coexistence. In order to move towards
a better future for all, a smooth transition to legitimate and stable governance in
Gaza under a reformed and revitalized Palestinian Authority (PA) is essential. The
international community, including Israel, should support the PA in restoring its
governance in Gaza and enhancing stability in the West Bank, with a vision to realize
the two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Peace and security in the Middle East is an interconnected puzzle made
up of interlinked pieces. All players in the region — not only those in Israel and
Palestine — should focus on constructing peace and stability. Developments in
Lebanon and Syria should lead to the rebuilding of State institutions in due course,
alongside active support from the international community, including the United
Nations. The mandates of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force should be respected and complied

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 27/41
with, and the safety of peacekeepers must be guaranteed at all times. The Houthis in
Yemen, who have been exploiting regional volatility, must reverse their stance and
join efforts to revitalize the Yemeni-led political process. Therefore, we reiterate our
demand that all State and non-State actors cease all attacks across the region. Any
acts that violate the territorial integrity of neighbouring countries, provoke opposing
parties or sow more seeds of retribution must stop.
Seizing this crucial momentum, let us now collectively chart a brighter tomorrow
for all in the region. The Republic of Korea will maintain its engagement in all
efforts to achieve that vision
Ms. Shea (United States of America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing earlier.
A ceasefire and hostage release deal was long overdue. Thanks to the efforts of
Qatar, Egypt and the United States, the sides have reached an agreement consistent
with resolution 2735 (2024) to end the conflict that Hamas set in motion more
than 470 days ago. This deal will halt the fighting in Gaza, surge much-needed
humanitarian assistance to Palestinian civilians and, most importantly, reunite the
hostages with their families after more than 15 months in captivity. It is the result not
only of the extreme pressure that Hamas has been under and the changed regional
equation after a ceasefire in Lebanon and the weakening of Iran, but also of dogged
and painstaking diplomacy.
The conflict should have ended long ago. We must never forget the lives taken as a
result of the brutal Hamas terrorist attack on 7 October 2023 and the horrors endured
by countless innocent people in the war that followed. We cannot allow Hamas to
continue playing spoiler on behalf of the Palestinian people any longer — not after it
started the conflict through its barbaric attack on 7 October 2023 and its deplorable
behaviour ever since.
We have seen Hamas cynically weaponize the suffering of Palestinians by using
civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, to store caches of weapons,
house fighters and coordinate attacks. We have also seen Hamas play the victim,
making appeals to the international community on behalf of Palestinians in Gaza
while at the same time actively making decisions and employing tactics that put
them in danger. We can no longer allow Hamas to dominate the Palestinian political
landscape in Gaza.
We welcome the Palestinian leadership’s recent statements emphasizing how
Hamas is placing the interests of Tehran over that of the Palestinian people and
thereby bringing about the destruction in Gaza. Israel’s fight is with Hamas, not with
the Palestinian civilians the terrorist group falsely claims to represent but often put
in harm’s way. No one benefits from a deepening humanitarian crisis in Gaza — least
of all the millions of Palestinian civilians mired in a conflict they did not start and
are powerless to stop.
Now is the time for all parties to ensure critical aid reaches those in need
throughout Gaza. We urge countries to support this effort through funding and
resources and to help scale up much-needed humanitarian aid.
As we all know, the work to finalize a ceasefire was difficult. It took far too
long to reach an agreement to end the bloodshed. In the near future, the region’s
leaders will need to make difficult choices to help forge a new reality. The United
States-, Qatari- and Egyptian-mediated ceasefire is a starting point towards a future
that provides equal measures of security, freedom and dignity for both Palestinians
and Israelis.
Despite the horrific toll of the conflict that Hamas unleashed, we have a historic
opportunity to dramatically transform the Middle East. It is long past time for the

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
28/41 25-01214
fighting to end and the work of building peace and security to begin, to help people
begin rebuilding their lives.
The United States will do everything in its power to help Israelis and Palestinians
seize this moment together and find peace through this agreement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Sir,
presiding over the quarterly open debate of the Security Council on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We note the active role of
the Algerian delegation, which voices the Arab world’s aspirations in the Security
Council, in keeping the attention of the Security Council focused on various
important aspects of that topic.
We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, where the bloody Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been raging for more than 15
months. We have just recently heard reports of an agreement reached between Israel
and Hamas on a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. As far as we know the agreement was
approved by both parties and a few hours ago it entered into force. We hope that
the results attained through mediators will last. Nonetheless, this is a reason not
only to rejoice, but also to take stock of this sad situation. We must not forget that
the inhabitants of Gaza paid for this with their lives. During the past 15 months,
Israel’s military operation in Gaza killed at least 47,000 Palestinian civilians; the
exact figure will be known only once the rubble is cleared. Such civilian casualties
have not been seen since the Second World War. That bloodshed should have been
stopped much earlier, but each attempt by the Security Council to adopt a resolution
with a call for an immediate ceasefire came up against Washington’s veto. Referring
to its so-called “quiet diplomacy”, Washington did everything it could to ensure that
the Security Council did not interfere with Israel’s actions on the ground.
From the very beginning of the crisis in Gaza in October 2023, Russia, along
with like-minded countries, consistently sought to establish a lasting ceasefire
and put forward the first draft resolution calling for that (see S/PV.9439). We also
insisted on the urgent delivery of humanitarian assistance to all in need. Knowing
that, despite those efforts, the Security Council was unable to implement its mandate
because of the actions of one permanent member is a bitter pill to swallow.
As far as we can tell, the latest deal is not fundamentally different from the
one that was discussed back in December 2023. That begs the question: was the
fine-tuning of the details really worth the tens of thousands of lives that were lost
since then in Gaza? Frankly speaking, that understanding does not spark joy in us,
even though Russia welcomes the fact that a deal has been concluded.
Yesterday we saw the start of the agreement’s first phase which provides for the
release of 33 hostages held in the Gaza Strip in exchange for a group of Palestinian
detainees in Israeli prisons. The implementation of the first phase will help to assess
the sustainability and viability of the entire agreement. It is a cause for cautious
optimism that, despite some difficulties at the initial stage, 19 January saw the release
of the first Israeli hostages and of Palestinians held in Israeli prisons. Pursuant to
the provisions of the agreement, from that moment on, hostilities ceased on the Gaza
Strip and the process of the phased withdrawal of Israeli forces started. We note the
beginning of the withdrawal of Israeli armoured vehicles from Rafah and the return
home of thousands its residents. However, let us look at today’s front page of the New
York Times which has photos of the houses to which Palestinians are returning to.
Those are not houses but just a pile of ruins.
We also note that the agreement provides for an increase in the amount of food,
fuel and medicine supplied to meet the Gazans’ need. According to Rik Peeperkorn,
World Health Organization Representative for the West Bank and Gaza, it will
take many years and at least $10 billion to rebuild the health system in Gaza. Less

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 29/41
than half of Gaza’s hospitals are currently operational. The issue of delivering the
adequate amount of humanitarian assistance to Gaza should become a priority of
the work of the Council. The Security Council resolutions can now be carried out
properly so members should focus on implementing them.
We commend the efforts of the mediators — first and foremost, Qatar and
Egypt — whose painstaking and persistent work made it possible for this important
agreement to be reached. We note that, at the final stage of the negotiations,
representatives of the new American Administration also got on board, which — as
we understand it — ultimately helped to break Israel’s unwillingness to come to
an agreement.
We trust that the implementation of the agreement will pave the way for the
stabilization of the situation in Gaza and bring home those who were temporarily
and repeatedly displaced, who number in the hundreds of thousands, if not more. We
also hope that the agreement will help to rebuild the Gaza Strip, which is currently
lying in ruins and resembles scenes from a post-apocalyptic film, and to reunite
Israeli hostages and Palestinian prisoners with their families. We expect that Russian
citizen Alexander Trufanov, who is currently in the Gaza Strip, will be among
those released
We have repeatedly stated that a ceasefire in Gaza is a precondition for stabilizing
the entire region. The implementation of the agreement gives a glimmer of hope
not only for a lasting normalization of the situation around the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict but also for creating the conditions for long-term improvements in the
situations in Lebanon, Syria and Yemen. Furthermore, there is now an opportunity
to create conditions for streamlining a comprehensive political settlement process
for the Palestinian question on a universally recognized international legal basis,
the ultimate aim of which is to establish an independent Palestinian State within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and security with
Israel. Only by implementing the two-State solution, endorsed by Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, will it be possible to break the vicious circle of
violence and bring genuine lasting peace to the region. As recent years have shown,
no agreement that bypasses the issue of a just settlement of the Palestinian question
will ever bring about sustainable peace in the region.
However, that is still a long way off. The past few months of war have highlighted
the problem of a lack of mutual trust and have fuelled radicalization on both
sides. The long-awaited deal is fragile, and any provocation may well jeopardize
its implementation. In particular, it is important for Israel to cease its practice of
building new settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory or expanding the
existing ones and for it to comply with Security Council resolutions. What is also
pertinent is how and by whom the ceasefire will be monitored. From both sides of
the barricades, we are already hearing the voices of those who are not satisfied with
the agreement and are just waiting for the right moment to accuse their opponents of
violating their obligations pertaining to it.
The entire international community is duty bound to protect the ceasefire and
amplify the voices of those Palestinians and Israelis who champion peace, not war.
For our part, we will closely monitor the implementation of the terms of the deal and
support any initiatives aimed at establishing an unconditional and comprehensive
ceasefire, ensuring safe and unimpeded humanitarian access and relaunching
negotiations on a universally recognized international legal basis, including decisions
by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to thank the
Algerian delegation for convening today’s meeting and the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
30/41 25-01214
France welcomes the entry into force of the agreement on a ceasefire and hostage
release in Gaza, made possible thanks to the efforts of the United States, Qatar and
Egypt. We call on the parties to implement it in its entirety. The agreement should
allow for the release of all hostages, including our two compatriots Ofer Kalderon
and Ohad Yahalomi, and the massive delivery of aid to the civilian population. In
view of the urgent situation, all access points must be opened without delay. The
work of international organizations and humanitarian actors must be facilitated by
Israel, in accordance with international law and the orders of the International Court
of Justice. The United Nations must be able to deliver aid freely. France reiterates
its full support for the irreplaceable work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The future of the Gaza Strip must be part of a future Palestinian State. We must
prevent Hamas from regaining a foothold in the Strip and must therefore prepare
for the return of the Palestinian Authority, which is responsible for administering
the territory. We must also ensure Israel’s security. No massacre such as the one
committed on 7 October 2023 can ever happen again.
France calls for the ceasefire to be an opportunity to set in motion an irreversible
process for implementing the two-State solution, with security guarantees for both
Israelis and Palestinians — the only way to ensure a just and lasting peace. France
is committed to that, within the Security Council and in all forums. In June 2025,
we will co-chair, along with Saudi Arabia, an international conference for the
implementation of the two-State solution. We call on the Israelis and Palestinians to
take the only path that will guarantee them a future of peace and security.
Implementing the ceasefire agreement should make it possible to write a new
chapter in the Middle East. In Lebanon, the election of President Joseph Aoun and the
appointment of Mr. Nawaf Salam to the post of Chairman of the Council of Ministers
are a source of hope. France hopes that a strong Government capable of bringing
Lebanon together in all its diversity will be formed as soon as possible. There is an
urgent need to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) to achieve a long-term solution
along the Blue Line that ensures respect for the security of Israel and Lebanon. In
Yemen, the peace process must resume, under the aegis of the United Nations Special
Envoy, and France urges the Houthis to stop their destabilizing actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Murillo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): For the Government of Colombia
and for me in particular, it is our honour to participate in the important debate that
brings us together today and even more so on a day that is highly symbolic for us and
is celebrated in the United States and around the world — Martin Luther King Day,
which marks the birth of a great peacebuilder.
We welcome the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria’s convening of and
invitation to this open debate and acknowledge the important work that it has carried
out this month in its presidency of the Security Council, as well as its support and that
of other members of the Council for peace in Colombia. The international community
and this forum in particular have witnessed Colombia’s unwavering commitment to
the search for peace and reconciliation, within and beyond our borders, even amid
numerous difficulties — because peacebuilding is obviously difficult. However, we
are talking about peace and not war.
Colombia is closely following the situation in the Middle East and in particular
in Syria, where it is expected that a new internationally recognized Government
will be formed that will take into account all the ethnic, cultural and religious
groupings in the country. The war unleashed in 2011 in Syria has been one of the
most devastating situations that humankind has faced in recent years. Syria became a

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 31/41
kind of testing ground for geopolitical confrontations, with no respect or thought for
the civilian population — a war that lasted 13 years, has killed an estimated 620,000
people and caused 7 million people to become internally displaced persons and more
than 6 million refugees. It is something that we cannot accept, and we must, as an
international community, prevent it from happening again anywhere else. Colombia
reiterates its willingness, good offices and capacity to coordinate, with the countries
of the region and the international community, all the necessary efforts in Syria to
build a country that can protect its civilian population and be a source of stability.
In the case of Palestine, now, we are confronted by a heart-rending state of affairs,
which demands immediate and coordinated action by the international community.
We are absolutely categorical in underscoring that the population of Palestine, which,
for decades has lived amid the horrors of war, is now facing a genocide and a war that
has intensified to unimaginable levels and has spread throughout the region.
My country again calls on the warring parties to engage in negotiations that lead
to a permanent ceasefire, full respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law in the Gaza Strip, with a particular focus on safeguarding the rights of women
and children. In that vein, Colombia acknowledges the role of the good offices of
the United States, Egypt and Qatar in securing the recent agreement to implement a
ceasefire between the parties that includes the release of Israeli hostages, and we call
for the unconditional release of Colombian-Israeli citizen Elkana Bohbot and all the
hostages so that they can return to their families. By the same token, the Palestinian
prisoners held by Israel must be released. It is our hope that that will be the starting
point for achieving a stable and lasting peace. Unimpeded access to humanitarian
aid is urgent and mandatory.
We have emphasized that the lack of a substantive solution to the Palestinian
question is putting to the test multilateralism as a principle of international relations
and the ability of the United Nations, in particular that of the Security Council,
to fulfil its primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security.
According to the Palestinian Ministry of Health, more than 45,000 people have
perished, and approximately 130,000 have been wounded since the war began. Also
before us is the hardship of forcible displacement inflicted on thousands of families
on a daily basis as a result of the war’s military operations and evacuation orders.
Accordingly, we support many of the solutions put forward, including the Kingdom of
Norway’s proposal, which the General Assembly has approved, for the International
Court of Justice to issue an advisory opinion on Israel’s legal obligations vis-à-vis
the activities of the United Nations, other international organizations and third States
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Colombia will continue to maintain that only a substantive solution — necessarily
involving the two-State solution set out in the 1993 Oslo accords — is urgently
required and is the best avenue for guaranteeing the right of the peoples of Israel and
Palestine to coexist in peace. In the process, the sovereignty of both States must be
reaffirmed and the secure and internationally recognized borders must be established,
in line with the resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Colombia stands ready to
contribute to peacebuilding and, to that end, is offering its good practices in that area
and in that of conflict resolution, as appropriate and as necessary. Moreover, as our
President, Gustavo Petro Urrego, has said, our country is fully available to provide
humanitarian aid to persons affected by the armed conflict and the war.
Lastly, we echo the appeal of the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for
the territorial integrity of Lebanon to be guaranteed and for attacks on its population
to end. It is our moral and legal duty to act in solidarity with the most vulnerable and
to strive tirelessly for a world in which tolerance, peace and mutual respect prevail.
It is our duty to safeguard life, build peace and protect the planet.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
32/41 25-01214
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister for International Relations
and Cooperation of Namibia.
Mr. Mushelenga (Namibia): Allow me from the outset to congratulate the
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month.
I wish to align my statement with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in
which Namibia has the honour of serving as Vice-Chair.
May I also take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for presenting the
latest update on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I join the preceding speakers in welcoming the ceasefire agreement reached
between Israel and Hamas as an immediate path to halting the bloodshed and allowing
humanitarian aid to reach those in desperate need. The devastating consequences of
the war in Gaza have preoccupied the Council and the General Assembly in their work
for the greater part of the past 15 months. The toll on human life and infrastructure
has set a precedent in terms of levels of violence and destruction in an ugly chapter in
human history that should never be condoned anywhere. The escalation of violence
over the past 15 months has been characterized by flagrant violations of international
law and gruesome atrocities, including genocide, the wanton destruction of civilian
infrastructure and the tragic loss of thousands of innocent Palestinian lives.
Over the period, aspersions have been cast on the ability of the Council to
carry out its core mandate of maintaining international peace and security. Namibia
commends the General Assembly for its consistent efforts to ensure that, when the
Council was paralysed, the membership of the General Assembly made its presence
felt and made strong and consistent calls to bring the war to an end. That substantiates
and validates the call to reform the Council so that it is more representative, as the
need to do things differently has never been more urgent.
Namibia commends the mediation efforts of Egypt, Qatar and the United States
and hopes that the ceasefire prepares a foundation for a just peace and a scaling-up
of humanitarian aid and ends the prolonged programme of annexation and settlement
expansion. Namibia’s position on the conflict remains grounded in our unwavering
commitment to international peace, justice and respect for international law.
The consequences of the war will reverberate for generations to come. For that
reason, Namibia underscores the dire need to address both the immediate crisis and
the underlying causes of the conflict. The cycle of violence cannot be broken through
military means alone. Sustainable peace requires addressing the root causes of the
conflict, including the occupation, the blockade and the denial of fundamental rights
to the Palestinian people. The humanitarian situation in Gaza is alarming, and it is
our fervent hope that the scaling-up of humanitarian assistance will be prioritized as
a matter of urgency and in accordance with the humanitarian aid protocols agreed to
as part of the ceasefire agreement. Unhindered access for humanitarian aid must be
guaranteed to provide life-saving assistance to the people of Gaza, including food,
water, medical supplies and the restoration of essential services to alleviate their
immense suffering. Namibia demands that Israel rescind, with immediate effect,
its legislation against the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as such legislation violates international humanitarian law.
Namibia further calls on Israel to uphold its obligations under international
law, including the principles of distinction, proportionality and necessity. Alleged
violations of international humanitarian and human rights law must be thoroughly
investigated, and those responsible must be held accountable.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 33/41
This crisis must serve as a reminder of the urgent need to return to a credible,
inclusive and negotiated peace process aimed at achieving a just and lasting
solution. That includes the unconditional realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination and the establishment
of a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian State, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel, based on the pre-1967 borders and the relevant United
Nations resolutions
Following the request by the General Assembly for an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice regarding Israel’s obligations in relation to the
presence and activities of the United Nations, international organizations and third
States, Namibia encourages all Member States to actively engage in the impending
Court proceedings by submitting written statements and observations. This is a
critical opportunity to reaffirm the principles of international law and underscore
the importance of accountability, cooperation and the protection of international
organizations as they fulfil their mandates by contributing to this process. Member
States can help clarify the legal responsibilities of all parties involved and strengthen
the international community’s commitment to upholding justice and the rule of law.
The people of Palestine have endured immense suffering for far too long — a
suffering that no nation and its people should ever endure. Namibia stands in solidarity
with the Palestinian people and reiterates its call for the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, to fulfil its mandate in maintaining international peace and
security. We also urge Member States to act in unison and with urgency to ensure
that the rights, dignity and aspirations of the Palestinian people are upheld.
As a nation that has experienced the painful legacy of occupation and emerged
triumphantly attaining liberty, Namibia firmly believes that the arduous road to
peace in the Middle East is approaching its ultimate destination. It requires political
will, mutual respect and a commitment to human rights and dignity for all.
In conclusion, the war in Gaza is a stark reminder of the consequences of
decades of unresolved conflict and unfulfilled promises. Posterity will judge us
for our inaction in the face of injustice, and we will forever stand condemned for
committing sins of omission. This war is a test of the international community’s
resolve to uphold the principles of justice, human rights and peace.
Therefore, in keeping with the resolve of world leaders reaffirming the principles
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, as set out in the Pact for the Future
(General Assembly resolution 79/1), we are duty bound to reflect on what more we
can do to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya.
Mr. Elbaour (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
like to wish you every success in managing the work of the Council. We would like
to commend Algeria, through the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ahmed Attaf, for
having convened this high-level meeting on this important matter.
There have been meetings for more than a year calling for a ceasefire. Today
we are meeting following an announcement of a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, which
came into force yesterday after 471 days of destruction, killings, and displacement.
That amounts to 67 weeks of bloody combat, air raids and bloodshed, with the world
watching one massacre after another in the Gaza Strip without being able to end the
aggression, the killings, displacement or the starvation of the besieged Palestinians
in Gaza.

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
34/41 25-01214
Such actions ran counter to all human values and international laws and
conventions, which, unfortunately, failed to prevent the occupation’s brutality
against every thing Palestinian. Nothing survived in the ugliest manifestation of
sabotage and destruction by war machines for 471 days before reaching the ceasefire
agreement, which we reached today. A huge toll was taken on a besieged people
without shelter, food or healthcare.
Today we are delighted that this agreement has been reached and that the guns
were silenced. We are delighted that children, women and the elderly in Gaza expect
that they are going to be able to spend a night without bombing or air raids, even
though they do not have a roof over their heads. The Gaza Strip has shown the
inability of the international community to maintain international peace and security,
to prevent wars, to protect civilians, to guarantee human dignity and human rights,
to deter the aggressor and to hold criminals accountable. Those are the very values
on which the United Nations was founded; those are the rules on which the Security
Council was established.
While my country welcomes this ceasefire agreement, concluded on 15 January,
we commend the sincere efforts by Qatar and Egypt and the constructive mediation
by the United States of America. In that connection, we should recall that there
is a need for everyone to commit to the implementation and sustainability of that
agreement and to follow international monitoring mechanisms in order to ensure
that the painful chapters that we have recently experienced do not happen again in
the Gaza Strip.
The whole Middle East region is facing economic, humanitarian, political and
even military repercussions because of the situation in Gaza. The situation is even
worse in the Gaza Strip, which was the theatre of war, displacement and starvation.
In that regard, we must stipulate that this ceasefire agreement in and of itself
cannot bring an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. We
need to support the ceasefire and accompany it with urgent international action in
order to improve the devastating humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. As the
international community, we need to act in order to coordinate our work, and we
need to provide urgent humanitarian support and assistance for the people in Gaza
because it is currently a scene of debris and rubble. The Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip have become homeless.
We have failed the Gazan people. We did so during the war, and today we need
to stand side by side with them as the international community. We must do so in
order to repair what was destroyed by the war. In these difficult circumstances,
we are also confronting provocative actions by the occupying Power, which said
that it wanted to suspend the activities and operations of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the
occupied Palestinian territories. That decision is not just a political or administrative
measure, but a direct attack on the rights of the Palestinian refugees and a systematic
attempt to undermine their cause and their right of return, which is guaranteed by
internationally legitimate decisions.
In that context, we call upon the Security Council to ensure that the occupying
Power honours its commitments pursuant to international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant United Nations resolutions. The international community
needs to protect UNRWA’s mandate and provide it with the necessary financial
resources so that it can provide essential services, without obstacles or restrictions,
to the refugees in the Gaza Strip and all occupied Palestinian territories.
In conclusion, the current agreement should not be viewed as an end point, and
we should not view 7 October 2023 as the start of the conflict, as some attempt to
portray it. Rather, that date needs to be placed in its appropriate context, as a result

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 35/41
of the continued consequences of the conflict. Therefore, this agreement must be
seen as a step that paves the way towards a new stage, in which a durable solution can
be found to the Palestinian question, putting an end to their suffering for decades.
This painful experience clearly shows that ignoring the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people just leads to more escalation that threatens international peace
and security and that putting an end to the Palestinians’ suffering serves everyone.
My country believes that the Palestinian people’s struggle and patience in
the face of all forms of discrimination and displacement must end. The deferred
international commitment to finding a solution to the Palestinian cause must be
fulfilled through recognition of the right of Palestinians to establish a Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the unwavering position of the Libyan State in its support for the Palestinian
cause, standing by the brotherly Palestinian people and doing what we can to support
them. My Government stresses that true peace can only be achieved by enabling the
Palestinian people to enjoy their rights to self-determination, restoring their full
rights, bringing an end to their suffering and establishing their State.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I thank Algeria for convening this important meeting,
and I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The issue before us has lingered on the Security Council’s agenda for more than
70 years, yet Israel’s injustices against the Palestinian people remain unresolved. In
the West Bank and East Jerusalem, illegal settlements are expanding with growing
violence and impunity. The Council’s failure over the past 15 months has obliterated
Gaza, with a catastrophic humanitarian disaster. We therefore sincerely welcome the
ceasefire agreement in Gaza and the start to the release of hostages and Palestinians
held arbitrarily. Although it comes at a devastating cost of tens of thousands of
innocent lives, we thank the mediators that have helped to bring about the ceasefire
agreement. The ceasefire is a vital first step towards attaining peace in the Middle
East. The Council must safeguard the agreement so that every phase is upheld. The
Council must help to break the cycle of violence.
The international community must focus on two priorities following the ceasefire
agreement in Gaza: first, ending the humanitarian catastrophe; and, secondly,
developing a comprehensive political plan to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
that regard, we fully support the Secretary-General’s call for sustained humanitarian
relief for the people of Gaza. Humanitarian aid must flow freely and without
obstruction in a sustained manner. Humanitarian workers must be fully allowed to
operate safely. Reconstruction efforts in Gaza must be prepared, including by lifting
the 18-year-old blockade that has strangled its economy. The role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is indispensable in
those efforts. We must restore and strengthen its capacity. The Council must shield
the Agency from persistent threats and misinformation campaigns.
Beyond addressing the immediate humanitarian needs, we must work towards a
just and comprehensive political plan, with a two-State solution at its core, in which
an independent Palestinian State lives side by side in peace and security with Israel.
Any other alternative will only lead to apartheid and subjugation. A peace process
imposed by a select few will also fail.
That is why the international community must unite to foster genuine dialogue
and negotiations that address the root cause of colonialism and historical injustice in
Palestine, including the right of return of the Palestinian refugees. Such a process must
place Palestine on an equal footing, guided by international law and internationally
agreed parameters. The upcoming High-level International Conference for the
Peaceful Settlement of the Question of Palestine and the Implementation of the Two-

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
36/41 25-01214
State Solution must serve as a turning point. The Council must create conditions
conducive to ensuring the success of the Conference
Finally, it is time for the Council to prove its relevance. Continuing to leave this
agenda item unresolved is not just unconscionable, but also a clear demonstration of
the urgent need to expedite reform of the Council. We give our heartfelt support to
the five new members of the Council. Our expectations are clear — please be guided
by humanity and leave no stone unturned in advancing the Palestinian cause. To the
five permanent members of the Council: it is time to end the Council’s paralysis and
restore the Council’s honour. History will judge us, whether the Council rises to the
occasion or fades into irrelevance
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Shiaan (Maldives): I thank Algeria, the President of the Council for the
month of January, for convening this quarterly open debate.
Maldives aligns itself with the statements to be delivered by the representatives
of Djibouti, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and Uganda, on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Maldives welcomes the ceasefire deal that has been reached and that is now in
effect, 15 months after the genocidal war in Gaza began. The cessation of hostilities
is a critical step towards halting the ongoing devastation and loss of innocent lives,
particularly of children, women and the elderly. The people of Gaza have endured
immeasurable hardship, and this ceasefire is a glimmer of hope for relief and
recovery. It is our hope to see the return of displaced people and an inflow of much-
needed humanitarian assistance.
Maldives commends the role of the countries that facilitated the negotiations
that led to this crucial ceasefire agreement. The international community must
now ensure the ceasefire agreement is enforced. This ceasefire represents not just
a moment of respite, but a critical juncture at which Israel can demonstrate its
commitment to the values enshrined in international law, in particular international
humanitarian law.
As such, Maldives calls on Israel to pay reparations to the State of Palestine for
the death and destruction caused over the past 15 months. In Gaza, relentless aerial
bombardments and the extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure, including
homes, hospitals, schools and critical services, have left long-term repercussions
for the population, and severe restrictions on humanitarian access have drastically
intensified human suffering. Recent United Nations reports underscore a surge
in civilian casualties, especially among children, and ongoing shortages of food,
water and energy. It is crucial that the international community not only support the
ceasefire, but also take immediate and meaningful action to address the humanitarian
needs on the ground. We call for urgent and scaled-up support for Palestine to ensure
a sustainable recovery from prolonged Israeli attacks.
Beyond the occupied Palestinian territory, the wider regional context compounds
those challenges. In Syria, the decade-long conflict remains unresolved, and recent
briefings to the Council highlight a persistent humanitarian crisis, particularly in
the north-west, where millions urgently need assistance. Although limited cross-line
operations have occurred, gaps in humanitarian cover persist. Millions of displaced
Syrians still lack basic necessities, a lack exacerbated by economic instability
and insufficient medical resources. We therefore call for a renewed international
approach, one that supports the Special Envoy’s political track, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), to pave the way for sustainable peace in Syria.
Despite the Council’s multiple meetings on this crisis, urgent challenges persist in
Gaza, the West Bank, Syria and Lebanon. We need a comprehensive and coordinated

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 37/41
strategy, one that enforces accountability, respects international humanitarian law
and addresses the root causes of conflict. The Maldives firmly believes that a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East can be achieved only through the establishment
of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We look forward to the upcoming United
Nations conference on Palestine in June, which will offer a vital opportunity for
the international community to renew commitments, intensify diplomatic efforts
and develop a clear path to end the crisis and secure a sustainable peace for the
Palestinian people.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States, and I beg your pardon, Mr. President,
for the length of the statement.
We meet today as the situation in the Palestinian territories is undergoing a
positive transformation. We hope that transformation will take root, following the
success of the efforts by Egypt, Qatar and the United States to conclude a three-phase
agreement on the exchange of prisoners and detainees and a return to sustainable
calm, leading to a permanent ceasefire. The agreement also includes the safe and
effective entry and distribution of humanitarian aid, the rehabilitation of hospitals, the
return of internally displaced persons to their places of residence and the facilitated
departure of sick and injured Palestinians for treatment. In that connection, we would
like to commend the efforts of the ministerial committee tasked by the extraordinary
Arab-Islamic summit to stop the aggression against Gaza.
Yes, mediation efforts did succeed in putting an end to the killing and destruction
of unarmed civilians in the Gaza Strip, albeit at a steep humanitarian cost, after
more than 45,000 Palestinians were killed, the infrastructure of the Gaza Strip
and its medical and educational sectors was destroyed, humanitarian and United
Nations staff and journalists were targeted and crimes were perpetrated against the
Palestinian people. It is no exaggeration to say that we have seen Israel annihilate all
the necessities of life in Gaza. Upon cursory inspection of the aerial photographs,
we encounter a level of destruction comparable to that visited upon Hiroshima and
Nagasaki; the images reveal a people in dire need of humanitarian support after
suffering unparalleled horrors
We should not regard the current deal as the endpoint, as has been suggested.
Rather, it is only a beginning on which it is necessary to build a new phase in which
the aim is to establish a lasting and comprehensive peace in the region and to spare
the region additional successive rounds of escalation. We present here the Arab
Group’s vision for the coming phase.
First, the Arab Group calls for the full implementation in good faith of all phases
of the ceasefire agreement and for all parties to abide by it, not to withdraw from it
and to refrain from any violations or further aggression against the Gaza Strip under
any pretext. The Arab Group calls on the international community to support efforts
to implement and consolidate the agreement and not to accept any Israeli pretexts or
motives that would allow a slide back into relaunching military operations.
Second, the Arab Group stresses the need for Israel to abide by the resolutions
taken by the Security Council and the General Assembly and decisions taken by the
International Court of Justice since the beginning of the crisis. The Arab Group also

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
38/41 25-01214
stresses Israel’s full and sole political and legal responsibility for the destruction
of the Gaza Strip, and it demands that Israel be held accountable for the crimes
and violations committed against the Palestinian people. The practices of starvation,
killing civilians and other atrocities, some of which were broadcast live, must not
go unpunished without accountability and compensation that restores some of the
rights of the victims. It is not right for voices to be raised in calls for international
law, justice and human rights to be upheld in situations pertaining to one particular
people or race, while falling silent when it pertains to the brotherly Palestinian
people. We are no less human than anyone else, and neither is Israel a State above
international law.
Third, in view of the catastrophic humanitarian situation in Gaza, we call for
the delivery of aid and the implementation of early-recovery projects to commence
immediately. That is an obligation incumbent upon Israel under the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the customary international law set out in the Protocol Additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 1977. An entire generation of children has been deprived
of education for more than a year and subjected to an unprecedented level of killing,
maiming and psychological trauma, in violation of jus cogens and of the principles of
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. In addition, civilians are suffering from near total
deprivation of basic services, such as water, electricity and health services, as most
health facilities have been damaged or destroyed. We also call on the international
community to uphold its responsibility to mobilize the necessary resources to launch
a wide range of reconstruction projects, in coordination with the Palestinian National
Authority and with a major role for the United Nations and its agencies and bodies,
especially the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The silent killing of civilians must be stopped.
Fourth, we emphasize the central and irreplaceable role of UNRWA in the lives
of the Palestinian people and its central role in providing humanitarian support to
the people of the Gaza Strip during the war. We express our appreciation for the
sacrifices it has made to perform that role. We stress the centrality of UNRWA’s role
in providing stability and delivering services until the establishment of a Palestinian
State. Therefore, we call for the Agency to be protected from Israeli schemes aimed
at ending UNRWA’s work in the areas of operation in the Palestinian territories. We
also call for pressure to be placed on Israel, the occupying Power, to compel it to
comply with its international obligations, including under Article 105 of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations, and to allow UNRWA to operate without restrictions.
Fifth, the Arab Group reaffirms that the Palestinian people’s cause is that of a
people’s right to self-determination and of bringing an end to the Israeli occupation.
Its cause does not concern Gaza alone — it extends to all Palestinian territories.
We therefore call for an end to the escalation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
resulting from continued settlement policies and from the granting of protection
to Israeli settler terrorism. We also call for an end to the policy of demolishing
Palestinian homes and facilities, preventing Palestinians from accessing their
resources and restricting the exercise by the Palestinian Authority of its powers. We
warn of the danger of continued incursions into Al-Aqsa Mosque or endeavouring
to change the status quo of the holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif or compromising the
Hashemite Jordanian custodianship.
Sixth, we call on the international community to heed the lesson that neglecting
the legitimate rights of the brotherly Palestinian people will lead only to successive
rounds of escalation which threaten international peace and security. Therefore,
Israel must show responsibility and abandon its delusions of expansion, occupation
and displacement and engage immediately in a negotiation process that grants the

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 39/41
Palestinian people their legitimate right to an independent State on the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We call on all parties to participate
in the high-level international conference on the settlement the Palestinian question
and the implementation of the two-State solution scheduled to be held in June.
Seventh, the Arab Group notes that in order to achieve peace and stability in the
region, Israel must also withdraw from all Syrian territories occupied since 1967. In
Lebanon, the Arab Group welcomes the ceasefire agreement and calls on all parties
to implement it and to end Israel’s aggression against Lebanon. Israel must withdraw
from the Palestinian territories in accordance with the 60-day deadline stipulated in
the agreement and commit to the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized borders.
The Arab Group welcomes the election of General Joseph Aoun as President of
the Lebanese Republic and the appointment of Judge Nawaf Salam to form a new
Government in Lebanon and urges the international community to support Lebanon
in its efforts to rebuild and the United Nations, which will play a critical role in
supporting Lebanon during this phase. The visit of Secretary-General to Lebanon
last week was proof of the Organization’s support for Lebanon and its people.
In my national capacity, I would like to reiterate Egypt’s firm position in support
of Palestinian rights. Egypt has spared no effort since the beginning of the current
crisis to stop the aggression and save the Palestinian people. Egypt has engaged with
Qatar and the United States in tough negotiations to end the war. Egypt has also
organized international meetings, most recently on 2 December 2024, to mobilize
humanitarian assistance for Gaza and has made every effort to ensure the delivery
of assistance, to host and provide treatment to its Palestinian brothers and to unify
the Palestinians. Egypt reiterates its readiness to host an expanded international
conference on the rebuilding of Gaza.
I also underscore Egypt’s commitment to its strategic choice of peace in the
region 47 years ago. We chose peace from a position of strength, confidence,
righteousness and justice to establish a just peace, stability and cooperation in the
region. Egypt looks forward to working with all parties to revive the Middle East
peace process within a specific time frame to end the occupation and establish an
independent Palestinian State, as that alone will guarantee the security of all peoples
in the region and their equal rights to a decent and secure life for everyone. Egypt
will continue tirelessly to coordinate with the partners to ensure the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement and calls on all Security Council members to uphold their
responsibility and moral duty to the Palestinian people not to fail them. We warn
against refusing to recognize reality and facts. We have a genuine opportunity before
us for a new beginning and we must not lose it.
In conclusion, as the President of Egypt, Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi stated:
“Egypt will always be loyal to the Palestinian people and support a just peace,
and it will be a true partner in achieving peace and defending the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.”
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, and I welcome you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, National Community
Abroad and African Affairs of Algeria. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
We are meeting today a few days after the announcement, in Doha, of an
agreement that puts an end to the conflict in the Gaza Strip, which has lasted

S/PV.9841 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/01/2025
40/41 25-01214
more than 15 months; caused immense human suffering and extensive destruction;
displaced most of its population and left 160,000 victims among the disappeared,
wounded and killed.
In order to alleviate this human suffering and stop the bloodshed, the State
of Qatar has made significant efforts, since the conflict began, to mediate, which
culminated in the two parties reaching, on 15 January, an agreement that came
into effect yesterday. Under the agreement, which consists of three phases, each
of which lasts 42 days, there will be an exchange of detainees, hostages, a return
to normality and the delivery and distribution of large amounts of humanitarian
assistance throughout the Gaza Strip. The agreement also stipulates the restoration
of hospitals, the provision of equipment and fuel. The agreement on the details of
the second and third phases will be finalized during the implementation of the first
phase. The State of Qatar expresses its thanks to the Arab Republic of Egypt and
the United States of America. The three countries, as guarantors of the agreement,
issued a statement confirming that they will work together to ensure the parties
implement their obligations and ensure the full continuation of the three phases.
The State of Qatar has spared no effort in its endeavours over the past 15 months.
In November 2023, we were able to stop the fighting and ensure the release of more
than 100 hostages and hundreds of Palestinians detainees. We have continued to
meet with partners and parties to the conflict in an effort to reach an agreement that
puts an end to the war and restores hope to the region.
Today we call on the Security Council to assume its responsibilities to monitor
the ceasefire agreement and adopt a binding resolution on the implementation of
the agreement.
It is now time to coordinate regional and international efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance and United Nations support in delivering it. The State of
Qatar will make every effort to provide support to the affected families and alleviate
the suffering of the people. Under the directives of His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin
Hamad Al Thani, Amir of the State of Qatar, it was announced today that a land
bridge will be established to supply fuel to the Gaza Strip. During this stage, the role
played by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is central, and therefore, we caution against the banning of the Agency’s
activities by the occupation authorities.
With regard to Syria, the State of Qatar affirms its unwavering position in
support of the Syrian people and reiterates its strong links with the Syrian Arab
Republic after 13 years of interruption due to the former regime’s brutal suppression
of the Syrian people. The State of Qatar welcomes the measures taken by the new
Syrian Administration to protect civilians, stabilize State institutions, provide
public services and facilitate the return of displaced persons and refugees. The
State of Qatar is committed to continuing to support its Syrian brothers. The current
humanitarian situation requires the support of the international community and the
lifting of sanctions as the reasons for the sanctions’ imposition no longer exist. The
State of Qatar stresses the importance of the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria and condemns the incursion of Israeli forces into the
buffer zone, which must be immediately reversed.
With regard to Lebanon, the State of Qatar welcomes the election of Mr. Joseph
Aoun as President of the Republic of Lebanon and the appointment of Nawaf Salam
to head the Government. We hope that this will enable the Lebanese people to achieve
their aspirations of development and prosperity. The State of Qatar will continue its
ongoing support for sisterly Lebanon and renews its permanent position in support
of its unity, sovereignty, security and stability.

20/01/2025 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9841
25-01214 41/41
We also welcome the ceasefire agreement in Lebanon and expresses our hope
for the commitment of all parties to it and to fully implementing resolution 1701
(2006). Moreover, we hope that the agreement will pave the way towards a broader
consensus to maintain durable peace and stability. We also underscore the need for
respect for the mandate of UNIFIL and safety of its personnel.
The only path towards stability and prosperity in the region remains a
comprehensive and just solution to the Palestinian question based on international
law, resolutions of international legitimacy, ending the occupation, halting settlement
activities and affirming the vision of a two-State solution — one underscored by
resolution 2334 (2016) and whose parameters were reiterated in the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of July of 2024 (see A/78/968), which should be
respected. It is necessary to reject any measures that would undermine a sustainable
solution to the Palestinian question, including attempts to annex Palestinian territory
and violate holy sites. The state of Qatar hopes that the ceasefire agreement will mark
the beginning of a new phase of serious work on solving the Palestinian question.
Qatar also stresses the importance of supporting Palestinian reconciliation during
the next stage. The issue of the governance of the Gaza Strip after the war is purely
a Palestinian matter.
In conclusion, we reiterate the state of Qatar’s unwavering position on the justice
of the Palestinian question and the legitimate rights of the Palestinians to establish
their independent, fully sovereign State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and its recognition as a fully fledged Member of this international
Organization.
The President: There are still a number of speakers remaining on the list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of members
with the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
I would like to sincerely thank the interpreters for their understanding and for
having generously given us some of their time to allow more speakers to deliver their
statements on this important issue.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.
