Statement by H.E. Cho Tae-yul
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
Session II: Discussion on the Global Geopolitical Situation
Johannesburg, February 20, 2025
Thank you, Minister Lamola,
Distinguished Ministers,
We meet at a critical juncture: our passage through the first quarter of the 21st century.
We must ask ourselves, what will this century be remembered for?
Most of us recall the optimism that prevailed at the beginning, hoping we can leave words like “geopolitics” behind, like we did phonebooks and typewriters.
Yet, the long shadow of geopolitics continues to loom over the world.
Wars and armed conflicts are at their highest level since World War II – in a year marking the 80th anniversary of the end of that war -- leaving innocents to suffer across the globe.
Let me also echo many distinguished colleagues in this room: these things matter for the G20, “the premier forum for international economic cooperation.”
Peace and security are the bedrock of economic development and well-being.
Separating supply chains from command chains, or shipping routes from regional disputes, is simply not possible.
But knowing geopolitics has returned, or has never truly left, is not nearly as important as understanding what we are dealing with.
For its contours are being redrawn, as security in Asia and Europe become ever more intertwined.
The Ukraine war, which will enter its fourth year in a few days, has caused more than enough suffering.
So, it is to our utter dismay that an increasing military cooperation between Russia and North Korea is escalating and prolonging this war.
More than 22 thousand containers of artillery shells and 100 ballistic missiles.
Over 11 thousand combat troops.
This is what North Korea has provided Russia to aid in this war of aggression.
And not empty-handed, for in return, North Korea seeks to receive advanced military technology that can enhance its capacity to threaten countries near and far.
Theirs is a collusion that violates the UN Charter, multiple UN Security Council resolutions, undermines the global non-proliferation regime, and threatens both Asia and Europe.
The Republic of Korea calls for an end to this war and an end to this illegal cooperation.
Any attempts to bring an end to the Ukraine war should take into account a potential risk of rewarding North Korea for its illicit military cooperation with Russia.
Standing in solidarity with Ukraine, my Government has provided 400 million US dollars of assistance under the ‘Ukraine Peace and Solidarity Initiative’ last year, and plans to provide an additional two billion over the next five years for Ukraine’s reconstruction.
Just as geopolitical tensions are shifting in one part of the world, there is cautious hope that they are finally easing in others.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the end of the brutal dictatorship of the Assad regime and hopes to see a new Syria built through the peaceful and inclusive political process that the transitional government has pledged.
We also welcome the recent ceasefire agreement in Gaza following the fifteen-month-long conflict, as well as the release of hostages.
We highly appreciate the diplomatic efforts made by relevant countries and hope for a swift and full implementation of the agreement so that it can catalyze regional peace and stability through diplomacy based on the two-state solution.
Elsewhere in the world, violence persists away from the spotlight but no less devastating in its impact.
The Republic of Korea reiterates its grave concern about the ongoing crises in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan and Haiti.
In particular, we remain deeply alarmed by refugees and massive displacement caused by the instability in these regions.
Distinguished Colleagues,
The G20 and its members have a responsibility to ensure that the 21st century is not remembered for the “Pandora’s box of troubles,” but for the promise of progress fulfilled.
That we need to work together to this end is simply a fact.
But, let us face another fact: how we work together also matters.
The Republic of Korea will do its part, actively engaging in the G20 process, as well as leveraging concurrent representation at other multilateral fora such as the UN Security Council (UNSC), the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Let me conclude by reflecting on the profound historic significance of this moment.
For the first time, the G20 presidency rests with an African nation: South Africa, whose history is a testament to resilience and renewal.
This land has proven that no crisis or division is permanent.
Let us take this uplifting lesson to our own work here, as we strive towards a better next quarter-century.
You can count on Korea for its full support every step of the way.
/End/
