About Us
News
Foreign Policy
Countries & Regions
Consular Services
Top > News > Press Releases > Reaching an Agreement based on the Comprehensive Plan to End the Gaza Conflict (Statement by Foreign Minister IWAYA Takeshi)
Press Releases
October 9, 2025
Japan welcomes that the parties reached the first-phase agreement, under the leadership of The Honorable Donald J. Trump, President of the United States of America and based on his Comprehensive Plan to End the Gaza Conflict on October 9, 2025 (on October 8, local time). Japan has strongly urged the cessation of Israeli unilateral actions, the release of all hostages, the realization of a sustainable ceasefire, and a fundamental improvement of the humanitarian situation in Gaza, and have continued diplomatic efforts in collaboration with relevant countries.
This agreement represents a significant step towards calming the situation and realizing a two-state solution. In this context, Japan expresses its respect for the tireless efforts of mediating countries such as the United States, Qatar, Egypt and Türkiye, and urges all parties concerned to implement the agreement in good faith and in a steady manner.
In the Gaza Strip, numerous precious lives, including those of civilians, have been lost to date, and the acute humanitarian situation cannot be overlooked. This agreement must be implemented, and the tragic situation must be brought to an end without delay. Japan once again strongly urges all parties to comply with international law, including international humanitarian law, and to ensure that necessary humanitarian assistance operations are carried out immediately and without any impediments throughout the Gaza Strip.
Japan will continue to work closely with relevant countries and international organizations, actively contributing to international efforts for early recovery and reconstruction of Gaza, alongside the urgent improvement of its humanitarian situation. Furthermore, Japan will also continue to play a practical and proactive role in bringing the realization of a two-state solution one step closer.
