• PM Abela addresses world leaders at the Two-State solution conference at the United Nations stating that “Just because something is hard does not make it impossible".
​
On behalf of the Maltese people, Prime Minister Robert Abela has today officially recognised the State of Palestine. This historic decision aligns Malta with the growing number of nations affirming Palestinian statehood as a cornerstone for achieving lasting peace in the Middle East. The Prime Minister was speaking at the United Nations Conference on the Two-State Solution.
In his statement, Prime Minister Abela said, “On behalf of the Maltese people, I have today confirmed our nation's recognition of Palestinian statehood. Today's step, however, is only one of many needed to achieve the dream of all those of goodwill. Starvation in Gaza must end. Fighting must stop now. All October 7th hostages must be released. Hamas has no future in the new Palestinian state." He added, “Malta is not naïve. We know that the road is hard and testing, but a peaceful two-state solution remains the only solution for the region, and we are ready to offer our assistance to give life to this solution. Just because something is hard does not make it impossible."
Malta has consistently condemned the terrorist attacks of 7 October 2023 by Hamas and has reiterated its call for the unconditional release of all hostages, alongside its urgent appeal for an immediate and permanent ceasefire in Gaza. The statements were delivered at a tailormade event as part of the UN General Assembly week currently happening in New York. Other countries who also confirmed the recognition of Palestinian statehood included Andorra, Belgium, France, Luxembourg, Monaco and San Marino. Australia, Canada, Portugal and the United Kingdom all recognised the Palestinian state on Sunday.
In parallel with its political commitment, Malta is also acting on the humanitarian front. On the eve of this announcement Prime Minister Robert Abela confirmed in a public message that 250 tonnes of flour from Malta had successfully arrived in Gaza and are to be distributed through the World Central Kitchen as humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people. Malta is also continuing to assist Palestinian children injured in the conflict, demonstrating the government's commitment to combine declarations for a better future with concrete action to address current suffering.
Prime Minister Robert Abela is currently in New York for the 80th session of the United Nations General Assembly, where more than 190 world leaders, including Heads of State and Government, are gathered to discuss global peace, human rights, and sustainable development under the theme set by UN Secretary-General António Guterres: 'Better United Together: 80 Years and Beyond for Peace, Human Rights, and Development'.
​
