His Majesty King Abdullah (II) ibn Al Hussein of Jordan,
His Excellency President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi of Egypt,
His Excellency UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres,
Excellencies and Esteemed delegates,
On behalf of the Government of India and just re-elected Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, I would like to thank The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, The Arab Republic of Egypt and the United Nations for convening this timely Conference in addressing the urgent humanitarian needs of Gaza.
2. It has been eight months since the Israel-Hamas conflict started in Gaza. India has taken a principled position by strongly condemning the death of helpless civilians, especially women and children. We have been emphasizing respect for international law and international humanitarian law under all circumstances. The barbaric terrorist attacks on 07 October last year deserves our unequivocal condemnation, and we demand unconditional release of all hostages. We have been repeatedly emphasizing that only a two-state solution achieved through direct and meaningful negotiations between both sides on final status issues will deliver enduring peace.
Excellencies,
3. India was one of the first countries to recognize Palestine, as early as 1988. India prides itself as being seen as a trusted development partner by the people of Palestine. Our developmental assistance to Palestine, in various forms, over the years, amounts close to USD 120 million, including USD 35 million as contribution to UNRWA. We are currently engaged in projects worth USD 40 million to improve the lives of Palestinian people. Capacity building, education and strengthening of institutions and governance structures is a corner stone of our partnership with Palestine.
4. Since the beginning of the conflict, we have so far provided around 70 MT of humanitarian aid, including 16.5 MT of medicines and medical supplies apart from USD 5 million as our annual contribution to UNRWA for FY2023-24. In addition, on the specific request from UNRWA, we are donating medicines, medical sundries and High-Energy Biscuits to UNRWA to address their urgent requirements. Further, I am pleased to announce the disbursement of USD 2.5 million, the first tranche of our annual contribution to UNRWA in the coming days.
Excellencies,
5. We reiterate the need for safe, timely and sustained supply of humanitarian assistance to the people of Palestine. I am confident that the outcomes of this timely Conference will further mobilize, streamline and accelerate the international community’s efforts in delivering urgent humanitarian assistance to Gaza.
Thank you.
