post-Cabinet press conference page 1 of 12
POST-CABINET PRESS CONFERENCE: MONDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2024
PM: Well, kia ora. Good afternoon, everyone. Good to see you all as we get into the
home stretch of the year. We’ve got a very big legislative agenda ahead of us in the coming
weeks, as we close out 2024.
Today, the second quarterly report on our Government’s nine public service targets has been
released for results to September 30 this year. And, as you know, our Government established
targets to focus our public sector and Government on delivering better results for
New Zealanders in health, education, law and order, work, housing and the environment by
2030.
Setting clear targets helps to focus resources, attention and accountability to improve the
delivery and the quality of public services, and these deliberately ambitious targets sit
alongside our quarterly action plans, our regular strategy committee sessions and the agenda
of rebuilding the economy, restoring law and order and delivering better public services.
They’re critical mechanisms to ensure the Government, and also the public service, remain
very focused on delivery for the New Zealand people. Now, these targets aren’t just numbers;
they are about taking meaningful action to drive progress, measure outcomes and create better
futures for all. Regular reporting allows us to be responsive, to really get under the hood of
what is going on in the public services that matter the most to New Zealanders, and to use the
data to make interventions and also decisions that will make the biggest impact.
It’s encouraging to see fewer victims of violent crime and a reduction in youth offending. We
still have a long way to go, but our Government’s extensive law and order agenda is laser
focused on going after criminals and keeping Kiwis safe. Work to get families out of emergency
housing is making significant headway, with data showing a more than 60 percent reduction
from when we came into office. This is a huge step forward, improving the lives of some of our
most vulnerable families. There’s also been small improvements in emergency department
and elective surgery wait times and in student attendance.
However, we know that there is much, much more to be done, and we also expect results to
move around between reporting periods and we know that we won’t always improve every
quarter. For example, the number of people receiving the jobseeker support benefit saw an
increase of more than 8,000 this past quarter. No doubt life is still tough for many
New Zealanders. Years of high inflation, high interest rates and a recession have taken their
toll. But I’m confident that we’re now turning the corner. Between tax relief, Family Boost,
expanded Working for Families credits, inflation relief and mortgage relief, life is getting
materially easier for Kiwis.
For example, inflation is now down to 2.2 percent, the lowest in three and a half years. Food
inflation is down to 1.2 percent from 12.3. We’ve seen wages grow faster than inflation for the
four quarters in a row under this Government, versus 13 quarters in a row where it went
backwards, and we have rents that are stable versus the $180 per week, under Labour,
increase. We see the OCR now down to 4.25 percent and meaningfully that means for a Kiwi
with a 25-year, $500,000 mortgage, they could save around $180 per fortnight. We’ve seen
three rate cuts under our Government, versus 12 rate rises under the previous one.
And economic sentiment is improving. We see consumer confidence at a three-year high, we
see business confidence at a 10-year high. Now, we expect job seeker unemployment to track
the economic cycle, and as the economy improves, those on jobseeker will come down. Having
said that, under Labour, despite lower unemployment and record job shortages, we actually
saw 60,000 more people go on jobseeker unemployment benefit, putting 40,000 more kids into
benefit-dependent homes.

post-Cabinet press conference page 2 of 12
Our Government will always champion a welfare safety net to help Kiwis in genuine need.
However, our strong expectation, as we have foreshadowed, is that those who are able to work
should work, and the more people who are working and the fewer who are on welfare, the
better for them, their future, the better for their families, and the economy, and for New Zealand.
Quite simply, employment is always going to offer people and their families more
independence, more choice, more opportunity, and more money than welfare ever will. A life
on welfare is not the way to maximise a young person’s creativity and untapped potential, we
want more for our young people. So we’ll continue to do everything we can to get the economy
growing so that we can create more employment and growth, but also to support people off
welfare and into work and ultimately a better life for themselves and their families.
With that, I’ll hand over to Louise Upston, who will provide a little bit more additional support
on what else we’re doing to get people on jobseeker into work.
Hon Louise Upston: Thank you, Prime Minister. Today, I’m pleased to talk about an essential
step forward in our efforts to reduce long-term benefit dependency by supporting more people
into work. The changes we are announcing today represent a clear commitment from our
Government to providing welfare that works for job seekers who are most at risk of long-term
benefit dependency. We are not prepared to accept the welfare system handed to us by the
previous Government, where beneficiaries under the age of 25 were projected to spend
20 years on benefits over their lifetimes. We’re not prepared to accept 13 years of welfare
dependency as a fate for people on jobseeker support who are ready to work now. We must
ensure welfare is a stepping stone to opportunity, not a life sentence.
We remain committed to having 50,000 fewer people on jobseeker support by 2030, and to
help achieve this I’m pleased to announce that as of today, MSD is now offering phone-based
employment case management to 10,000 people. This means the total number of people
supported by an employment case manager at any given time is 70,000, up from about 53,000.
These 70,000 will also begin receiving individual job plans, which are a cornerstone of our
Welfare that Works programme. These job plans will include a new, comprehensive work
readiness needs assessment that will go beyond a standard examination of someone’s work
history and their availability, looking at the root causes of what’s holding them back from
gaining employment. Case managers will dig deeper and consider any education, transport,
addiction, health and childcare issues that a job seeker may also have. A plan will then be
designed which includes actions and timelines to address the issues. Job seekers will be
connected to the support services they need, whether it’s literacy programmes, driver
licensing, mental health support or addiction counselling.
But with increased support comes responsibility. Job seekers will be required to follow through
on the agreed steps in their job plans, and those who fail to meet work-testable actions may
face sanctions through the new Traffic Light system. This initiative will provide robust support
to job seekers, while also empowering them to take ownership of their journey towards
employment and self-reliance. It is not enough to simply offer financial assistance. Real
empowerment comes when people are given the tools and the opportunities they need to fully
participate in society. The introduction of individual needs assessment job plans and the
expansion of MSD’s case management services will equip job seekers with the support and
structure they need, and help break the shackles of welfare dependency that are holding them
back. And with that, I’ll hand back to you, Prime Minister.
PM: Thanks, Louise. Look, in terms of this week, tomorrow I’ll meet the Czech President,
Petr Pavel, in Wellington. On Wednesday and Thursday I’ll be in Southland before returning
to Auckland. Parliament, as you will all know, has a different rhythm this week, given it’s
scrutiny week. And with that, Minister Upson and I are very happy to take your questions.
Media: Prime Minister—or to both of you, actually—how much pressure does your 50,000
target by 2030 come under, given that you’ve seen an uptick of 8,000 in just one quarter?

post-Cabinet press conference page 3 of 12
PM: Well, look, as I said, there’s no doubt about it: we’re seeing unemployment has
been really challenged in the last quarter, and it’s forecasted to actually get up to 5.2 percent,
from memory. It’s at 4.8 today. That is a function of the lag effect of the inflation, the interest
rates and the recession that we’ve been experiencing. Employers can only hang on for so long
with suppressed demand and rising costs, and they get squeezed and ultimately they end up,
sadly, laying off workers. And that’s why we keep saying if you care about working
New Zealanders, you’re a fiscal conservative and you run the economy well. So we know that
there is a real link here between jobseeker and unemployment.
Now, having said that, what was amazing, to be honest, in the previous administration, was
that co-relation between unemployment and economic growth got disconnected and you saw
a situation where you actually had low levels of unemployment, high levels of job seeker. And
that’s the bit that we’re trying to get back into play again.
So we know there’s work to do for us to continue to grow the economy, and we’ve broken the
back, I think, of a lot of the cost of living pressures around inflation and around interest rates,
and that’s why our focus now moves to economic growth and also jobs. That’s really where
the opportunity is for us as we come out of this recession. But importantly we also have to put
in place obligations to make sure that jobseeker and unemployment actually get co-related
together.
Media: Do you expect that this 8,000 in the September quarter is the peak of new
beneficiaries coming into the system?
PM: Well, as I’ve said, you know, you’ve got a forecast coming from us that I think has
downgraded slightly from the Reserve Bank Governor last week. If I just remember to take that
number, for example, we’re at 4.8, up from 4.6.
Media: I’m talking about beneficiary numbers. So can you say that the 8,000 that we’ve
seen in the September quarter is the peak, given that you say that you’re remaining optimistic
about the 2030 forecast?
PM: Well, we’re determined to deliver on 2030. We’ve still got a long way to go,
obviously. There’s two parts to that, as I’m trying to say: one is the link to economic growth
and the second part is the co-relation between job seeker numbers and unemployment rates.
The unemployment rate is forecast to lift a little bit further before it comes down but—you know,
and that’s when we start to expect jobseeker to come down.
What we’re trying to do is also make sure the system is ready. We don’t have to wait for
unemployment to reach peak and then start trending down for us to be ready to do everything
we can, and build the capacity and the capability in the MSD system to get people into work
as more and more jobs appear as the economy gets better.
Media: How much more challenging will it be to reach that target of 50,000 fewer people?
PM: Yeah, no doubt about it; it’s challenging. But all the targets there are deliberately
ambitious and that’s why I tried to, you know, say up front as to why we’re doing targets like
this. Because we know they’re difficult, we know they’re challenging, we know they’ll bounce
around from quarter to quarter, but the point is that it is forcing us to have quite high-quality
conversations with CEs and Ministers as a strategy group, for example, that we run a regular
session around to say: what more can we be doing around emergency housing, around
jobseeker?
This is a—a consequence of those conversations is to say we actually need to make sure
we’ve got more case management in place, which Louise has done an exceptionally good job
of putting into place. She’s done an exceptionally good job of just making it clear about

post-Cabinet press conference page 4 of 12
obligations. You know, if you think about, you know, we’ve now seen a 50 percent, 52 percent
improvement in the number of people that are actually showing up and engaging with their
case manager. As a result, they’re showing up for job interviews, they’re doing what the—90
percent who are non-compliant with their obligations are getting compliant within a month.
That’s exactly what we want to see. So I think Louise is putting good management into place
with MSD, but we know we’ve got more to do.
Media: Minister Upston, is there enough mahi for our whānau and our rangatahi,
particularly in the rural areas, given that Jobs for Nature is no longer going to be funded?
Hon Louise Upston: Yes, absolutely. And one of the things that I’m really encouraged by, if
you look to the four months July through to October, we’ve actually seen 22,000 people exit
jobseeker benefit into work, which is 4,100 more than a year ago. So despite the economic
challenges that the Prime Minister outlined, we are seeing really strong exits into work, so I’m
encouraged by that.
Media: Particularly in the rural areas, given that Jobs for Nature won’t be funded?
Hon Louise Upston: Yeah. So one of the things I’m committed to is making sure that the
programmes that we fund lead to good outcomes, and case management is one of them. That
is why we have increased the number of people in case management from about 53,000 to
70,000, because we know it works. And we want to see more Kiwis off jobseeker benefit and
in jobs, and that’s why we’re doing it.
Media: Of that figure, how many are Māori?
Hon Louise Upston: About 40 percent.
Media: Just on that job availability, do you truly believe there are jobs out there? Because
we have spoken to someone today who’s been looking for a job for nine months, a former truck
driver. They say they simply can’t find a job. They’ve had one interview in the last four months.
So are there jobs out there for people?
Hon Louise Upston: There are, and I accept it is really challenging. So when you’re at this
part of the economic cycle, finding employment is tough. But as I said, I’m really encouraged
by the fact that we’ve seen 22,000 people exit the jobseeker benefit into work in the four-month
period July through October, 4,100 more than a year ago. So what we are doing is working,
but I won’t say for a moment that it’s not tough for those that are out there looking for work and
I’d encourage them to keep taking those steps.
Media: How many people now, as either a number or a percentage, are in the red level of
the Traffic Light system?
Hon Louise Upston: One percent.
Media: One percent?
Hon Louise Upston: One percent, and as the Prime Minister was saying, 90 percent comply
with their obligations within a month. And I’ve been with frontline MSD in the last week and
what they’re saying is it’s really obvious that job seekers now know what are the steps they
have to take, and they’ve had multiple examples when someone’s gone to orange—and that’s
only 0.6 percent—they’ve gone on the phone straight away to say: what do I need to do? What
do I need to do to get back in green? What are the steps I need to take? So it’s also meant
that the responsibility is back on the job seeker for doing the things that they need to do, really
commonsense steps to help improve their chances to get a job.

post-Cabinet press conference page 5 of 12
Media: And that 1 percent figure, is that more than you had anticipated? Is it about on line?
Are you happy with that level at the moment?
Hon Louise Upston: It’s actually lower than I thought we might see. So if you look at it the
other way, 98 percent, over 98 percent are complying with their obligations and they’re at
green.
PM: Which is great.
Hon Louise Upston: So that’s great news.
PM: What we’re trying to address there, Jason, just so we’re clear, is that for decades,
if you go back and track unemployment and you track jobseeker, there was very good co-
relation between those numbers. And then in the last administration you saw a massive
disconnect where those two things didn’t stay co-related, and they should have, and part of
that was because of some of the settings that I think we got wrong.
That’s why we’ve put the obligation settings in place. When you have a 52 percent
improvement in people actually showing up for interviews and case management engagement,
that’s fantastic. That’s exactly what we want to do. All we’re expecting people to do is to deliver
on their obligations, which is quite simple: show up to your case management, get your resume
together, and show up for a job interview. They’re not rocket science, but just do those basics.
And so that’s why the obligation framework’s in place, to make sure that people understand
that, because their fellow Kiwi, through their taxes, is paying for that and wants to support them
in that transition.
They don’t—you know, then we have to do—you know, we’re saying jobs are difficult and we
know that there’s higher levels of unemployment than we’ve experienced. You know, we were
at 3.2, we’re now at 4.8. I’d just say in the last few decades 4.8 is still, you know, pretty low
levels of unemployment, but we’ve still got a little bit more where we expect it to rise a little bit
to 5.2. But we’re doing everything we can now to get growth and jobs moving in the right place.
Jo?
Media: Louise, those rural, isolated communities where we’ve seen mill closures and stuff,
for example, and there really aren’t other options—what is the expectation there around people
having to move before, say, disciplinary proceedings kick in?
Hon Louise Upston: Yeah, so the point I want to make is the sanctions aren’t applied if you
can’t find a job.
PM: Correct.
Hon Louise Upston: They apply if you’re not taking steps to find a job. And that’s a really
important distinction, particularly when we do know it is challenging out there, and—
Media: Is that within a geographical location as well, though? Because is the expectation
that you look for work outside of your town, for example?
Hon Louise Upston: If appropriate. And, look, I know—I know very well how hard it affects
rural communities, and that’s why the early response team at MSD are doing a fantastic job
where there are those big closures. And if you look at WPI, for example, they’ve seen a really
strong success so far in people being able to relocate, in some cases, for positions. But that
really intensive work they do with those that are potentially being made unemployed, to help
them connect to jobs faster, is important.
Media: Just to be clear though, there wouldn’t be any disciplinary measures for people who
can’t find work within the community that they already live in because of work closures?

post-Cabinet press conference page 6 of 12
Hon Louise Upston: Well, there is also assistance to help them relocate to where a job is
available, so—
Media: So there is a point where the expectation is that you move?
PM: The expectation is that you engage with your case manager—you can’t just not
take the call—and actually meet with them. You actually have to have a resume prepared.
That’s your job to make sure that comes together. We’re putting career support and other
things in place to help you do that. And then thirdly, you’ve got to show up for interviews. Now,
whether the interviews are in your region or outside of your region, you’re doing everything you
can to find a job, and that’s what we’re trying to make sure. You’re not getting penalised here
for not getting a job; you’re getting penalised here for not doing your job, which is to look for a
job, and to be doing every—your job is in fact to do everything you can to find a job and that’s
what the Traffic Light system is designed to do.
Media: But will you be penalised, though, if you’re not looking for a job outside your region?
PM: Well, that will be up to individuals, but we would expect people to be wanting to take
a job and to do everything they can to get themselves into work and connected with work again.
Media: People can’t exactly up—
PM: Sorry, Maiki.
Media: Do you have a bit of an overview at the moment of where those big closures have
been—a lot of them obviously are in rural areas—of what sort of a percentage of those workers
have actually found more work?
Hon Louise Upston: Yeah, so I don’t have the figures on the WPI one but the Alliance in
Timaru, they’ve had really good success in some of those workers relocating to other
meatworks in the South Island and, as I said, there is assistance available to help them do
that. They had a really successful job fair. So for some people it will mean retraining. It might
mean going into a slightly different role. But that’s why those early response teams that MSD
have on the ground, working with other employers, working with the sector, working with those
job seekers—because the reality is they want to get back in work and quickly, which is why we
are providing assistance to them.
Media: But are beneficiaries punished if they do not move for work?
Hon Louise Upston: Well, I think that would be a conversation that they would have with their
case manager.
Media: Is it your expectation that they’d be punished if they refuse to move for work?
Hon Louise Upston: No. As I said, they’re not being punished if they can’t find a job. It’s about
the commonsense steps that they need to take. And look, for some people, they’ll have a
house, they’ll have kids in school, there’ll be a whole bunch of life circumstances they have to
deal with, and MSD take that into consideration. For those that are affected this is a massive
life shock, and it’s really important that the team are working with individuals and their individual
circumstances to support them on the next step.
Media: So it sounds like if MSD believes they can move for work and they choose not to,
they could be punished?
Hon Louise Upston: I’m not saying that, I’m saying—and as I’ve outlined today, we’re taking
a very individual approach—

post-Cabinet press conference page 7 of 12
PM: Case by case.
Hon Louise Upston: —to job seekers, case by case, depending on their circumstances, and
it’s providing assistance that is unique to them. That might be very different from someone else
who’s in the same—come out of the same organisation.
Media: There’s always been a group that have been sort of hardened, that have been hard
to get off the benefit. What is your perception—or whether you have any stats, I don’t know—
around what that split is now, because obviously unemployment has gone up and obviously
numbers have gone up? What is the number or percentage of the sort of hardened, probably
going to be really difficult to move off, versus those who actively do want to find more work, do
you know?
Hon Louise Upston: So I can give you a breakdown of those that have been on for longer
durations, but I’ll give you an example from Southland last week. Of the total in Southland that
were on the jobseeker benefit, 50 percent had come on in the last year. So it is really important
that we look differently at the job seekers that have come on to jobseeker benefit, to connect
them with employment as quickly as possible, and that’s why this really intensive work is
important. So we don’t want to see benefit dependency increase, which is unfortunately what
happened under the last Government, which is why we’ve got a far more active system, far
more individualised, so that we can provide the support and individual needs rather than just
a blanket approach.
PM: And Jo, the only thing I’ve got to say to add to that was it’s really interesting because
by virtue of these nine better public service targets, we’re making some improvements in terms
of better management, you know, as you’re seeing around emergency housing, for example,
and some of the other pieces. But when you start to think about kids that aren’t attending
school, families that are in emergency housing, families that are long-term unemployed, we’re
getting to a common cohort across all our social services that actually, through our social
investment model, we’re having to—we need to innovate more strongly to try things differently,
to get different outcomes for and with those people.
And so that’s the—it’s—I’m just trying to give you an insight into the nature of the conversations
we’re actually having, say, in these strategy sessions where, you know, Andrew Coster, our
new head of social investment, Nicola Willis leading that agenda with our social services
Ministers, we’re starting to get to what—you know, that cohort that often has got more complex,
more challenged needs. Yes, we can work our way through a lot of it through good
management and better process, but equally now we’re getting into some of that conversation.
Media: Sorry, you just touched on this briefly before, Louise, but obviously the longer
people spend on the benefit, the harder it is to get people off as well. So how concerned are
you with the fact that we are going to see unemployment still go up and we’re going to see
more people have to go on to jobseeker benefit for some time? How concerned are you that
as that stretches out, as that becomes consistent, that it is actually going to be harder at the
other end too?
Hon Louise Upston: Well, that’s why we look at, you know, what—with an individual need
assessment, what is the barrier that that individual faces and how do we support them? Is it
mental health counselling? Is it driver licensing? Is it that we need to get them literacy and
numeracy training? So rather than stand back and do nothing, first of all is really look at: what
is that individual need? A case manager to work with them and a job plan, because we are
committed. It’s every single person, one job at a time, and that’s why this individualised
approach is really important.
Media: Prime Minister, can I get your response to the Supreme Court judgment out today
regarding the Marine Area and Coastal Act case?

post-Cabinet press conference page 8 of 12
PM: Yeah, look, what I’d say about that is obviously it’s pretty new. It’s just come out.
We’ll take some time to digest it and Paul Goldsmith will have more to say about it.
Media: But do you agree personally with the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the Act?
PM: Well, as you know, I mean, we’ve—all we’ve wanted to do is ensure that the Act is
actually what Parliament—you know, the practice is what Parliament intended when the law
was passed in 2011. Again, as you can appreciate, it’s a pretty new ruling. We need to digest
it and Paul Goldsmith will say more about it.
Media: Is your Government going to continue to pursue that amendment bill?
PM: Again, what I’ll just say is that the ruling has only just come out and we need time
to digest it, and Paul Goldsmith, who’s leading our MACA legislation, will have more to say
about it.
Media: But you must have known ahead of this that it could either go one way or the other.
You would have had a response either way. I mean it’s a valid question. Are you still going
ahead with the amendments? You would have known that this was a possibility and you would
have game-planned this out.
PM: Yeah, we’ve just received the report. As you know, there was an appeal filed. We
got a response within 10 days from the Supreme Court overturning what looks like the Court
of Appeal decision, but in fairness, you know, we need time to go through it and we’ll work out
next steps from there.
Media: Prime Minister, the International Criminal Court a couple of weeks ago issued arrest
warrants for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the former Defence Minister, Yoav
Gallant. If either of them came to New Zealand, would we enforce those warrants?
PM: Yes. We support the ICC and as I’ve said to you all along, those are matters before
the court, but we believe in the international rules-based system. We support the ICC and we’d
be obligated to do so.
Media: Just on a slightly different topic, is the Government still planning to clarify and
deliver the redress for the Royal Commission into abuse in state care before the end of the
year?
PM: We’re working—it won’t be before the end of this year, as we said at the
announcement of the apology. I think you might have been away, Mark, at that time. But what
we’re doing is we’re working very, very hard to make sure that we get a redress system in
place. We understand the urgency. We understand the needs of those survivors. I think, you
know, the Government’s moving at great pace. Erica Stanford’s doing a great job of leading us
through it. It’s difficult, you know, as I’ve said—3,000 pages, six, you know, six years in the
making, 138 recommendations—but we know the redress system is a major focus for us.
Media: Just on that, have you ruled out gang members being part of redress?
PM: Again, all of those conversations are ongoing as to exactly how the redress system
will be developed, and we won’t be talking about it until we’re ready to talk about it.
Media: There was a story on RNZ this morning about Ministers talking at a meeting about
lowering expectations for survivors. What’s your read on that?
PM: Well, I don’t comment on Cabinet conversations.

post-Cabinet press conference page 9 of 12
Media: I’m not sure it was a Cabinet meeting, actually.
PM: Sorry?
Media: I’m not sure it was a Cabinet meeting.
PM: A Cabinet committee meeting, wasn’t it?
Media: Yeah, but they were OIA’d and they were sent out, so the information’s out there in
the public. So should survivors have their expectations low for redress?
PM: All I’d say to you is we are going—we are working incredibly hard on what is a very
complex set of issues to make sure that we can develop a redress system that, while it may
not meet the needs and expectations of each and every individual—I know that’s the reality of
it. We as a Government are looking for a system response to it and we’re working incredibly
hard. There’s a lot of issues to work through, there’s a lot of complexity to work through, and
each and every case is different and I acknowledge that. And as we’ve seen in areas like
Treaty settlements, people have different views as to whether it’s too much, too little. That’ll be
revealed in due course, but we’re not going to negotiate that or talk about that through media.
Sorry, Claire. Sorry, I’ll come to you, Sean.
Media: Prime Minister, have you heard any briefings on the avian flu?
PM: Yes, I was made aware of that yesterday afternoon. Essentially on Friday night, you
know, MPI were made aware that avian flu was here. It is the H7 variant. As you know, it’s a
mutation of the current avian flu we already have in New Zealand, but you would have had a
briefing from Minister Hoggard and MPI on it with the high pathogen piece. And what I’m
pleased about is the rapid response from MPI. I’m also really pleased with the engagement
that MPI had with the farmer, who was also someone who understood the risk really well and
has worked incredibly well with MPI. So, you know, what we see is that there’s strict controls
in place to restrict, you know, movement of birds. There are no further reports actually of any
avian flu beyond the one farm that we’re focused on right now. There are no food safety
concerns, and importantly agencies, I think, at this stage have responded very well.
Media: Have you had any modelling done on how much it might cost to control it if there
was an outbreak?
PM: Well, I just want to be clear because there is what’s called H5 avian flu, which you
all know is the one that we are all concerned about. That’s sitting in the wild bird populations
and, you know, is the thing that MPI and the agencies have been preparing for, and the sector
as well. That is not what we’re talking about here. What we’re talking about is a strand of avian
flu in New Zealand that has mutated and become a high pathogen variant of it, and that is what
we’re now managing.
Obviously, the long-term planning around H5 avian flu is something that we really are
concerned about and we’re watching. It’s going to be transmitted into New Zealand through
wild birds, largely, probably, through Antarctica. And so, you know, we’ve had MPI working
very, very well, I think, in preparing for that, but at this stage that’s not present in New Zealand.
What is present is the H7 variant, and a mutation of that is what we’ve seen with the poultry
today.
Media: Prime Minister, is the Government likely to review the decision not to grant Candace
Owens a working visa to New Zealand?

post-Cabinet press conference page 10 of 12
PM: Yeah, we have a legal framework, as I understand it, with Immigration New Zealand
where if an application is rejected in Australia, it’s essentially rejected here. I know Minister
Stanford’s taken advice on that and I’ll let her go through that.
Media: And when are we likely to find a decision?
PM: I’m not sure on the timing. I just know the Minister’s asked for advice on that.
Media: Just on the ferries, it’s coming up close to the deadline for that decision.
PM: Yes.
Media: Are you going to meet the deadline to have an announcement for us?
PM: Yes, we will.
Media: What is the deadline?
PM: We said we’d have an answer before the end of this year.
Media: OK. No actual date?
Media: December 11th is my understanding, Prime Minister.
PM: Don’t you worry, we’ll have you an answer and we’ll have a ferry solution.
Media: Just vaguely nautical related, we haven’t really seen—well, actually very nautical
related—I don’t think we’ve had a response from you on the report about the Manawanui
sinking. What’s your reaction to the report, how all that went down?
PM: Yeah, look, I mean you saw, I thought, a very good debrief from the Chief of Navy
and also from Minister Collins last week. As it was identified from this report, clearly, you know,
100 percent laid at the error of human error. There’s obviously more work to do in the first
quarter of next year to work out next steps and some more detail around that. But, you know,
I think the Court of Inquiry process is a really robust, very rigorous one that we can trust
completely. You know, it’s a very high standard of investigation, and good on the Navy and the
Minister for fronting that and being upfront to say it is human error that led to the sinking of the
Manawanui.
Media: Were you a bit embarrassed reading that?
PM: Well, look, I mean, I’m more important—it’s more important we’re transparent and
we get the facts out. And, you know, what I have to say is what is a very unfortunate accident,
yes, caused by human error—what I have been impressed on is the response from our teams
subsequent to that. To give you a feel for it, you know, we’ve now—you know, we’ve got great
monitoring happening in the oceans around whether there’s pollutants in there, and we’re
pretty relaxed there. What we’re now focused on is actually getting the uplift of that fuel out of
the Manawanui, which actually the salver’s on its way and we hope to start that process mid-
December, working incredibly hard. Hopefully have it off before the end of the year if not around
that period of time, and then I’ll feel really good about it because we will have de-risked a lot
of the environmental impact and threat that sits there.
Then we’ll work our way through the next set of issues around what happens with respect to
fishing bans in Samoa, also with respect to ultimately what happens with the hull itself, and
those are questions that we just are working our way through very sequentially, dealing and
focusing the system on what it needs to focus on. I had a good chat with Prime Minister Fiamē
on the weekend again about that. And, you know, the way that Samoa and New Zealand have

post-Cabinet press conference page 11 of 12
been working together in what has been a very unfortunate accident, and very well, I think is
very impressive.
Media: Did the question of compensation come up in that conversation?
PM: I raised it and talked about, you know, that I’m aware of the concerns of folk who
have raised compensation. It’s been talked about, obviously, amongst the media. But for right
now, what we’ve agreed on is: look, our focus is on uplifting that fuel out of that ship. It’s really
important, particularly as we head into hurricane season in January/February. Then we’ll have
conversations around the fishing ban, and making sure we’ve got science and evidence that
says that it’s the Samoan Government-imposed fishing ban around that area that’s impacted
a few villages in the south. We need to make sure that we’ve got good evidence about that,
that everyone’s comfortable with that, and then we’ll talk obviously about compensation
concerns that people may have and then the future of the hull, whether it’s turned into a
tourism/diving experience or other things. We’ll work that way through. But, you know, what
I’m pleased about is—unfortunate accident, yes, caused by human error. Good Court of Inquiry
process about it. Now we work our way through those issues really, in a very focused way.
Media: Prime Minister, can you see the New Zealand Government delivering a formal
apology to the villages affected but also Samoa for the Manawanui incident?
PM: Well, look, I mean my conversations right from the get-go and my regular
conversations with Prime Minister Fiamē has been, you know, that we are sorry for what has
been an unfortunate accident. You know, we now have worked our way through it together
and, as I said, we will pick up those issues once we’re confident we’ve uplifted all the fuel and
we’ve minimised and de-risked the risk of an environmental catastrophe, which is not what we
want to see. And so that’s our major focus for now. Those issues we will park and we’ll explore
later on.
Media: Just on AUKUS and Labour putting the big "no" sign up over the weekend, what
does that mean for sort of the preference around bipartisanship when it comes to that?
PM: Well, I can just say a few things. One is it is really important that we continue to
explore whether or not New Zealand would participate in AUKUS Pillar 2. It’s important that
we explore it as to whether we would proceed or not based off our own national interests. And
so, you know, the rather ironic thing is that 12 months ago, that was something that Chris
Hipkins was advocating for, and all we’ve done is continue the work that he kicked off in
October 2021 under the Labour Government. So, you know, it was a bit—you know, to be
honest, it was a bit sad, to be honest, to hear that party and politics has been placed ahead of
country, when we’ve actually worked incredibly hard. And I know I did the same thing in
Opposition is that on foreign policy issues, where the position has been exactly the same as
the previous administration, we actually should have good alignment in that. And so I think it’s
pretty disappointing to see bipartisanship breaking down on foreign policy because people are
putting party and politics ahead of country.
Media: Do you think this might ultimately go the way of TPP?
PM: Well, I think if you called it "the progressive and comprehensive AUKUS Pillar 2",
maybe you’d find a future Labour Government may gladly implement it.
Media: Minister Upston, do you have insights into MSD’s engagement with the Pacific
community and how many Pacific people are actually getting jobs? Has there been an uptake?
Hon Louise Upston: So I don’t have that data in front of me, but I do know, in terms of the
jobseeker target, we’ve got a big push in South Auckland, particularly with young people, and
making sure that we are funding programmes that we know work for young Pasifika so that
they don’t get stuck on the jobseeker benefit.

post-Cabinet press conference page 12 of 12
Media: Can you just give a list of the programmes that you’re looking to fund to target
Pacific unemployment?
Hon Louise Upston: Yeah, so the case management is a big one. And the phone-based case
management we’ve rolled out in the first instance to young people, so that we can identify what
are the challenges or barriers they have. Flexi-wage continues to be a well-supported
programme, as is Mana in Mahi and initiatives like that.
Media: And how confident are you in these programmes? We see one in four young Pacific
people are unemployed.
Hon Louise Upston: Yeah, so we do know that Māori and Pasifika are disproportionately
represented on the jobseeker numbers, and when the labour market gets tighter it is harder
for them, which is why we are not sitting back and waiting until the economy turns the corner.
We’re working intensively with young people now, with individual solutions based on their
needs.
PM: Great. OK, well, thank you, everybody. Appreciate your time. Thanks for your time.
Have a good week.
conclusion of press conference
