The Honourable Mélanie Joly, Minister of Foreign Affairs, today announced that Canada is imposing new sanctions under the Special Economic Measures Act. These are the first sanctions measures listing extremist Israeli settlers. Canada remains concerned with extremist settler violence and will examine additional measures in response to the grave breach of international peace and security posed by their violent and destabilizing actions against Palestinian civilians and their property in the West Bank.
May 16, 2024 - Ottawa, Ontario - Global Affairs Canada
The Honourable Mélanie Joly, Minister of Foreign Affairs, today announced that Canada is imposing new sanctions under the Special Economic Measures Act. These are the first sanctions measures listing extremist Israeli settlers. Canada remains concerned with extremist settler violence and will examine additional measures in response to the grave breach of international peace and security posed by their violent and destabilizing actions against Palestinian civilians and their property in the West Bank.
Attacks by extremist Israeli settlers—a long-standing source of tension and conflict in the region—have escalated alarmingly in recent months. This has undermined the human rights of Palestinians, prospects for a 2-state solution and posed significant risks to regional security.
The United Nations has reported that since October 7, 2023, there have been at least 800 settler attacks against Palestinians. Many Palestinian civilians have been verbally or physically assaulted or killed; private property has been damaged and farms destroyed. These attacks have resulted in the forced displacement of Palestinian communities and significantly contributed to growing regional insecurity.
Today’s measures represent a significant step in Canada’s response to this ongoing violence. The individuals listed below have engaged directly or indirectly in violence and violent acts against Palestinian civilians and their property. These measures will impose a prohibition on dealings related to the listed individuals and render them inadmissible to Canada under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.
The 4 listed individuals are the following:
David Chai Chasdai
Yinon Levi
Zvi Bar Yosef
Moshe Sharvit
Canada continues to oppose the expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and is committed to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
“The rise in violence by extremist Israeli settlers against Palestinians in the West Bank is deeply troubling and poses significant risks to peace and security in the region. While I was in the region recently, I heard directly from families that have been forced to leave their homes and farming lands as a direct result of violence and threats by extremist settlers. With these measures, we are sending a clear message that acts of extremist settler violence are unacceptable and that perpetrators of such violence will face consequences.”
- Mélanie Joly, Minister of Foreign Affairs
