Background
Despite the recent ceasefire agreement, the situation in Gaza remains volatile and unpredictable. Canada is deeply concerned about the scale of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and remains committed to individuals approved to come to Canada under the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza.
Public Policy Considerations
The goal of this public policy is to facilitate entry into Canada for foreign nationals with approved temporary resident visas that were issued facilitation under Part 1 and Part 2 of the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza. This public policy positions the Government of Canada to follow through on its commitment to those directly affected by the crisis in the Gaza Strip who have been approved, but have not yet able to travel to Canada.
As such, I hereby establish that, pursuant to my authority under section 25.2 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (the Act), there are public policy considerations that justify the granting of an exemption from the application of any of the listed provisions of the Act and Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (the Regulations) to foreign nationals who meet the eligibility criteria and conditions listed below.
Eligibility Criteria and Conditions
Based on the public policy considerations, delegated officers may grant an exemption from the provisions of the Act and Regulations listed below to foreign nationals who meet the following conditions:
1) The foreign national
holds a temporary resident visa that was issued following facilitation under the Updated Temporary Public Policy to Facilitate Temporary Resident Visas for Certain Extended Family affected by the Crisis in Gaza; and
seeks to enter Canada as a visitor.
Provisions of the Act and the Regulations for which an exemption may be granted for foreign nationals meeting the conditions:
Paragraph 20(1)(b) of the Act – the requirement for a foreign national to establish that they will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay (obligation on entry);
Subsection 22(2) of the Act – the requirement for a foreign national to establish they will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay;
Section 39 of the Act – the requirement for a foreign national not to be inadmissible for financial reasons.
Other Admissibility and Selection Criteria
All foreign nationals eligible under this public policy are subject to all other applicable statutory eligibility and admissibility requirements not otherwise exempted.
Effective Date and Expiration:
This public policy comes into effect on April 23, 2025, and will expire on April 23, 2026. This public policy may be revoked at any time without prior notice.
The Hon. Rachel Bendayan, P.C., M.P.
Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship
Dated at Ottawa, this 21st day of March 2025
