Statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, H.E. Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, at the meeting of the Ministerial Committee on Palestine of the Non-aligned Movement, october 15, 2025.
Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished representatives of Member States,
The Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip have for years been subjected by Israel, the Occupying Power, to a collective punishment of outrageous brutality, under the gaze of those whose silence echoes louder than their power to stop it.
In the past two years, more than 66,000 Palestinians have been killed, including women and children. Over one million people have been displaced. The number of wounded has risen to more than 168,000, in a healthcare system that has been deliberately annihilated.
It is indisputable that the responsibility for this genocide lies directly with the government of Israel, but also with that of the United States, whose unwavering and unconditional political, financial, military, and diplomatic support has granted Israel impunity and emboldened further atrocities.
Even so, two years after an escalation of unrestrained violence, the Palestinian people have not only resisted with defiant strength, but have kept alive the hope of a free State.
Mr. Chairman,
Following the recent conclusion of the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit on October 13, the United States government has called for the reconstruction of Gaza while sidestepping any commitment to the recognition of the State of Palestine.
We acknowledge the efforts and good faith of the members of the Non-Aligned Movement who played an active role in seeking a diplomatic solution to the crisis in Gaza, and we remain cautiously observant of the terms of the Peace Agreement reached, given the ambiguities regarding its content and timeline.
We trust, nevertheless, the intelligence, courage, and resilience demonstrated by the Palestinian people to defend their legitimate right to a comprehensive, just, and lasting solution that ends the atrocities they have suffered for decades and fulfills their rightful aspiration to a future of peace and dignity for present and future generations.
Mr. Chairman,
The fundamental premise for the realization of a free and independent Palestinian State and the dismantling of the Israeli Zionist occupation must be grounded in the principles of self-determination and the sovereign equality of all States.
The inalienable right to create an independent and sovereign Palestinian State, within the borders prior to 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital, must be recognized, guaranteeing the return of refugees.
Should the United States government seek to demonstrate authentic political will and a sincere commitment to peace, it must end its opposition to Palestine’s admission as a member State of the United Nations –supported by more than 150 member countries of this organization–, recognize it as an independent State, and cease using undemocratic vetoes in the Security Council to obstruct the effective action of the United Nations in support of the Palestinian cause and the promotion of peace in the Middle East.
We must uphold our demands for a permanent ceasefire, guaranteed by the adoption of concrete and comprehensive measures to achieve a just and lasting peace.
We must also continue to strongly denounce the atrocities committed by the Israeli Occupying Power against Palestine, including the recent and cruel interception of the Global Sumud Flotilla by Israeli forces, and reject the illegal occupation of Palestinian territories.
Mr. Chairman,
As long as injustice prevails in Palestine, Cuba will remain a steadfast voice of solidarity —condemning violations, offering support, and advocating for truth.
The solidarity of the Non-Aligned Movement with Palestine is a matter of principle and historical justice.
Let us reaffirm on African soil—with its stirring anti-colonial and emancipatory history—our unwavering commitment to a truly free and independent Palestine.
Thank you
(Cubaminrex)
