Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9499
Security Council
Seventy-eighth year
9499th meeting
Friday, 8 December 2023, 3.30 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. De la Gasca López Domínguez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)
Members: Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Dautllari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. França Danese
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Biang
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ishikane
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Gatt
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fernandes
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Polyanskiy
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Abushahab
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wood
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
23-39552 (E)
*2339552*

S/PV.9499 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 08/12/2023
2/10 23-39552
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Cambodia, the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, the Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, the Gambia, Grenada, Guyana,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in the
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2023/970, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Afghanistan, Andorra,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Cambodia, the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, the Comoros, the Congo, Costa
Rica, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, the Gambia, Grenada,
Guyana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
draft resolution presented by the United Arab Emirates
(S/2023/970), which in less than 24 hours garnered
the co-sponsorship of at least 97 States Members
of the United Nations, is clear in its intention: an
immediate humanitarian ceasefire. It reiterates the
Security Council’s demand that all parties comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, notably with regard to
the protection of civilians. It demands the immediate
and unconditional release of all hostages. And it
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on an urgent and continual basis on the draft resolution’s
implementation. It is brief, it is simple, and it is crucial.
The draft resolution echoes the call for a
humanitarian ceasefire made by world leaders,
humanitarian organizations and, most recently,
the Secretary-General in his extraordinary letter
(S/2023/962). We have expedited the negotiation
process because, after 63 days of conflict and after
18,000 people dead, there is nothing else left to do or
say other than to demand this war be brought to an end.
The imperative of saving as many lives as possible right
now must supersede every other consideration.

08/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9499
23-39552 3/10
The adoption of resolution 2712 (2023) on
15 November mattered, but it was not enough. The
bombing of Gaza must stop. Humanitarian aid needs
to be delivered at scale, and the lives of scores of
civilians, including Israeli hostages, must be protected.
I implore all Council members to vote in favour of this
draft resolution.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For two months now, the Security Council
has been unable to fulfil its function of maintaining
international peace and security and to demand an end
to the bloodshed in the occupied Palestinian territories
and Israel. There is only one reason for this: the hard-
headed, selfish and destructive position of the United
States, which, in seeking to protect its ally by any
means, is essentially prohibiting the Security Council
from intervening. For all that time, the Council members
have been forced to listen to Washington saying that it
was allegedly working within the bounds of its “quiet
diplomacy” and that it would be better for everyone else
to stay out of it, while numerous American emissaries
travel about Middle Eastern capitals.
The outcome of this “quiet diplomacy” is a
cemetery of Palestinian children, which is what Gaza
has become: thousands of dead civilians and merciless
Israeli bombings that have destroyed hospitals, schools
and facilities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Most
importantly, the outcome is an Israel that has been
encouraged to activate a new phase of its military
operation and is now also planning to flood tunnels
in the enclave with sea water, which further threatens
more monstrous humanitarian consequences. Yet
again, American diplomacy is leaving scorched earth
and destruction in its wake.
As our experience shows, it is hard to expect common
sense from the current United States Administration.
We have no illusions on this front. However, an
absolutely exceptional situation has come about, in
which we need to act without blinkers on. How are our
American colleagues going to explain their actions to
their own citizens, hundreds of thousands of whom are
coming out to protest in American cities in defence
of Palestine, if once again, they block the demand for
an immediate ceasefire? How are they going to look
their Middle East partners in the eye — partners who
today are collectively asking for them to support the
draft resolution proposed by the United Arab Emirates
(S/2023/970)? I hope that they realize how this is going
to be seen in the region and beyond.
Today the entire world has stood up to defend
Gaza from total destruction and to defend its residents
from complete extermination. Now our colleagues in
the Council definitely need to at last, once and for all,
make the right choice and, alongside the overwhelming
majority of the progressive international community,
support the demand for an end to the violence.
Otherwise, they will end up on the wrong side of
history, having supported inhumane, barbaric actions,
and history will not forgive them.
Since the beginning of the escalation, the Russian
Federation has been calling on the Security Council to
respond with a demand for an immediate ceasefire. We
proposed a draft resolution on this subject (S/2023/772)
as early as on 16 October. Unfortunately, owing to the
position of Western delegations, it was not adopted
(see S/PV.9439). Today is 8 December. Unfortunately,
another month and a half has been wasted.
The greatest appreciation should be shown for the
courage and professionalism of Arab diplomacy and
in particular that of the United Arab Emirates, which
have taken it upon itself to prepare such a necessary
product calling for a ceasefire. We also note that, in
form, it is drafted in the best traditions of the historic
decisions of the Security Council on the Middle East.
And we can say with confidence that, regardless of the
outcomes of today’s vote, Abu Dhabi has already made
a contribution to the work of the Security Council that
will be remembered for a long time to come.
Our Western colleagues today have one
more — perhaps their last — chance to rehabilitate
themselves and to vote in favour of the draft resolution
that is proposed by the United Arab Emirates on behalf
of all of us. We hope that they will take advantage of
this opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates

S/PV.9499 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 08/12/2023
4/10 23-39552
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, 1 against and
1 abstention. The draft resolution was not adopted,
owing to the negative vote of a permanent member of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates is deeply disappointed about the
outcome of today’s vote. Regrettably, and in the face
of untold misery, the Council is unable to demand a
humanitarian ceasefire.
Let me be clear. Against a backdrop of the Secretary-
General’s grave warnings, the appeals by humanitarian
actors and the world’s public opinion, the Council is
growing isolated. It appears to be untethered from its
own founding document. What is the message we are
sending Palestinians if we cannot unite behind a call to
halt the relentless bombardment of Gaza? Indeed, what
is the message we are sending civilians across the world
who may find themselves in similar situations?
The disappointing outcome of today’s vote will not
deter us from continuing to implore Council members
to act and bring the violence in Gaza to an end. The
Council must unite and act on the war, and the United
Arab Emirates will continue to insist it does.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): Despite a
rushed process and a lack of appropriate consultation
by the authors of draft resolution S/2023/970, the
United States engaged in good faith on the text.
We proposed language with an eye to arriving at a
constructive draft resolution that would have reinforced
the life-saving diplomacy we have undertaken since
7 October, increased opportunities for humanitarian
aid to enter Gaza, encouraged the release of hostages
and a resumption of humanitarian pauses and laid a
foundation for durable peace. Unfortunately, nearly all
of our recommendations were ignored, and the result of
the rushed process was an unbalanced draft resolution
that was divorced from reality and would not have
moved the needle forward on the ground in any concrete
way. And so, regretfully, we could not support it.
We still cannot comprehend why the draft
resolution’s authors declined to include language
condemning Hamas’s horrific terrorist attack on Israel
on 7 October. It was an attack that killed more than 1,200
people — women, children, the elderly and people from
a range of nationalities, burned alive, gunned down,
subjected to obscene sexual violence. We are very
disappointed that the authors offered for the victims
of those heinous acts neither their condolences nor a
condemnation of their murderers. It is unfathomable.
Nor is there any condemnation of the sexual violence
unleashed by Hamas on 7 October. Over the past 20
years, the Council has repeatedly underscored the need
to take seriously all reports of conflict-related sexual
violence. Yet the Council and many of its members
have been conspicuously silent in response to reports
that Hamas committed acts of sexual and gender-
based violence on 7 October. Those incidents must be
investigated and condemned, just as they are in any
other conflict.
It is equally disappointing that the authors declined
to add language reaffirming that the International
Committee of the Red Cross must be permitted
to access and provide medical treatment for the
hostages still being held by Hamas terrorists and other
extremists. The draft resolution also fails to encourage
a resumption of humanitarian pauses to allow for the
release of hostages and an increase in aid. That formula
has worked. It could be resumed very quickly if Hamas
agreed to release women and civilian hostages.
The text failed to acknowledge that Israel has the
right to defend itself against terrorism, consistent with
international law. That is a right to which all States
are entitled. As I stated earlier today (see S/PV.9498),
no country could or should tolerate what Hamas did
on 7 October. If any of our own countries had been
attacked in that way, we would all expect the Council to
reaffirm our right to protect our citizens. Perhaps most
unrealistically, the draft resolution retains a call for
an unconditional ceasefire. I explained in my remarks
earlier today why that was not only unrealistic but
dangerous. It would simply leave Hamas in place, able
to regroup and repeat what it did on 7 October. A senior
Hamas official recently stated that the group intends
to repeat the vile acts of 7 October “again and again
and again”. And yet today’s draft resolution essentially
says that Israel should just tolerate that, and that it
should allow this terror to go unchecked. That is not
tenable, it is not realistic, and it is a recipe for disaster

08/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9499
23-39552 5/10
for Israel, the Palestinians and the entire region. As
long as Hamas clings to its ideology of destruction,
any ceasefire is, at best, temporary and is certainly
not peace. Any ceasefire that leaves Hamas in control
of Gaza would deny Palestinian civilians the chance
to build something better for themselves. For that
reason, although the United States strongly supports
durable peace, in which Israelis and Palestinians can
live in peace and security, we do not support the draft
resolution’s call for an unsustainable ceasefire that will
only plant the seeds for the next war.
Like the other members of the Council, I am
heartbroken by the images out of Gaza and the deaths
of the many thousands of civilians, including children.
Every innocent Palestinian life lost is a tragedy that
rips apart families and communities. It goes without
saying that the United States supports the renewal
of humanitarian pauses to enable the release of
humanitarian aid and the provision of additional aid,
even as we seek an end to the war, not for just one day
or one week, but forever.
Let us be clear. It is the draft resolution’s authors’
rejection of the United States’ sensible, indeed
essential, proposals that has deprived the Council of
an opportunity to support the tough work necessary
to break the cycle of violence and lay the foundation
for a more peaceful and secure future. The United
States will continue the hard work of diplomacy to
free the hostages, increase the protection of civilians,
expand humanitarian aid and create an opportunity for
Palestinians and Israelis to live side by side, in peace
and security.
We also need to redouble our collective efforts to
surge humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people
and create the conditions necessary for humanitarian
assistance to reach people who need it and are in
desperate need of food, water and shelter. We are
working towards that every day with Israel, Egypt,
the United Nations and others. As President Biden
reiterated last week, “A two-State solution is the only
way to guarantee the long-term security of both the
Israeli and the Palestinian people”. We will continue
to work for that goal, because as Secretary Blinken
has said, that is the only way to ensure lasting security
for a Jewish and democratic Israel and the only way
to ensure that the Palestinians achieve their legitimate
aspirations for a State of their own.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
is extremely concerned about the humanitarian tragedy
happening in Gaza. The Secretary-General sounded the
alarm, and he was right. That is why France voted in
favour of draft resolution S/2023/970 and why we are
pleading for a new, immediate and lasting humanitarian
truce that can lead to a permanent ceasefire.
For our part, we see no contradiction between the
fight against terrorism and the protection of civilians in
strict compliance with international humanitarian law.
We would have liked to see the Council finally condemn
the terrorist attacks by Hamas and other terrorist
groups on 7 October. Unfortunately, once again, the
Council has failed owing to disunity and a refusal to
enter into genuine negotiations. In so doing, at a time
when the crisis in Gaza is worsening and threatening
to spread, the Council has failed to live up to the
fundamental mission entrusted to it by the Charter of
the United Nations. Nonetheless, France will continue
to be resolutely committed to the full mobilization of
the Council on all aspects of the crisis — the security,
humanitarian and, above all, political aspects.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I begin by thanking the United
Arab Emirates for its tireless efforts on the draft
resolution (S/2023/970). We deeply regret that the
Council was unable to call for an immediate ceasefire,
despite the desperate need for one.
In his letter to the Security Council invoking Article
99 of the Charter of the United Nations (S/2023/962),
the Secretary-General conveyed a clear message: the
situation in Gaza is untenable and catastrophic, with
hostilities inflicting immeasurable suffering and with
public order on the brink of collapse.
As stated earlier today, Malta remains gravely
concerned by the crisis that has engulfed the region
since Hamas’s attacks on 7 October. We reiterate our
firm condemnation of Hamas’s brutal terror attacks
on Israel and its people, including sexual violence
and the mutilation of bodies. We continue to reiterate
our calls for the release of all hostages immediately,
safely and unconditionally, as mandated by
resolution 2712 (2023). The full implementation of all
provisions of that resolution is now even more critical.
While recognizing Israel’s right to protect the
population, we emphasize yet again that its military
operations must always abide by international
humanitarian law, including the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. As was

S/PV.9499 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 08/12/2023
6/10 23-39552
also stated this morning, the protection of civilians,
civilian infrastructure and humanitarian workers
must be prioritized. All parties must comply with
their obligations under international law. The severely
deteriorating humanitarian conditions within Gaza
must be urgently addressed. That must include safe and
unhindered humanitarian access for United Nations
humanitarian agencies and implementing partners to
facilitate the provision of essential goods and services
to the well-being of civilians, especially children. The
adequate scaling-up of the provision of supplies to meet
the needs of the civilian population also remains urgent.
Those are critical steps that are needed to save lives
and to avoid further devastation and the breakdown of
public order.
Our diplomatic efforts must be geared towards
mitigating the risks of a regional spillover. We must
strive to establish a durable foundation of peace
and security for Palestinians and Israelis alike. The
parameters for that are well known and have become all
the more evident in the midst of this horrific crisis. A
recommitment to a comprehensive peace for the Middle
East that prioritizes the two-State solution has never
been more critical.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): We
are gravely concerned about the desperate situation in
Gaza. The scale of civilian deaths and displacement in
Gaza cannot continue.
We welcomed the extended humanitarian pause last
month and the release of hostages and humanitarian aid
deliveries that took place during it. We call for further
and longer pauses to get aid to Palestinians and allow
space for further hostage releases.
But we cannot vote in favour of a draft resolution
that does not condemn the atrocities Hamas committed
against innocent Israeli civilians on 7 October. Calling
for a ceasefire ignores the fact that Hamas has committed
acts of terror and is still holding civilians hostage.
Israel needs to be able to address the threat posed by
Hamas, and it needs to do so in a manner that abides by
international humanitarian law, so that such an attack
can never be carried out again and so that we can work
meaningfully towards a two-State solution that delivers
statehood for Palestinians, security for Israel and peace
for people on both sides. That is why we abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution (S/2023/970).
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We all had the opportunity to express our full positions
this morning (see S/PV.9498), so allow me to just add
the following.
Switzerland voted in favour of the draft resolution
presented by the United Arab Emirates (S/2023/970)
in the knowledge that a humanitarian ceasefire is
understood as a time-limited humanitarian pause,
without prejudicing Israel’s right to ensure its defence
and security. Switzerland regrets the fact that the draft
resolution was not adopted.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
joins others in thanking the United Arab Emirates
for its tireless efforts in drafting the draft resolution
(S/2023/970).
At the core of the draft resolution submitted by
the United Arab Emirates on behalf of Arab countries
is the request for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and
for all hostages to be released. The draft has nearly
100 co-sponsors, including China. We express great
disappointment and regret that the draft resolution has
been vetoed by the United States.
Two months of fighting has already caused
unprecedented death and destruction. An immediate
ceasefire is the overriding prerequisite. On the issue,
any negative attitude is untenable and any attempt
at justification is feeble. It needs to be pointed out
that condoning the continuation of the fighting
while claiming to care about the lives and safety of
people in Gaza and the humanitarian needs there is
self-contradictory. Condoning the continuation of
the fighting while advocating the prevention of a
spillover of the conflict is self-deceiving. Condoning
the continuation of the fighting while making special
mention of the protection of women and girls and of
human rights is extremely hypocritical. All of the above
demonstrates yet again the double standards at play.
Although the draft resolution has been vetoed, the
international community’s strong calls for a ceasefire,
an end to the fighting, the protection of civilians and
the prevention of a greater humanitarian disaster will
not subside. The efforts of the Security Council to
uphold justice and fulfil its duties will not stop.
We urge Israel to heed the call of the international
community and stop its collective punishment of the
people in Gaza. We support further diplomatic mediation
to promote the early release of all people held captive. We
call on all relevant parties to pool all efforts towards the
common goal of ending the fighting in Gaza in order to

08/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9499
23-39552 7/10
keep alive the hope of survival for the Palestinian people
and the hope of peace in the Middle East.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): We thank the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates for proposing
draft resolution S/2023/970. Ghana voted in favour
of the draft resolution because we believe that the
humanitarian situation in Gaza is rapidly deteriorating
and has to be urgently addressed to avoid a human
catastrophe. While acknowledging the international
community’s overwhelming desire for an immediate
and unconditional humanitarian ceasefire, we believe
that the draft resolution could have included a
condemnation of the heinous attacks perpetrated by
Hamas on 7 October. As a Council, we need to ensure that
our draft resolutions address all the underlying issues
at hand in order to maintain the Council’s objectivity
and its credibility in acting as an honest broker for a
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian question
based on a two-State solution.
In conclusion, while we regret that the draft
resolution was not adopted, we reaffirm our commitment
to a two-State solution and express the hope that the
Council can take future actions that will help save lives.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I think it would be no exaggeration to say
that this day is one of the darkest in the history of the
Middle East. By once again cynically blocking a call for
a ceasefire in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict zone, our
colleagues from the United States have literally, before
our eyes, issued a death sentence to thousands, if not
tens of thousands, more civilians in Palestine and Israel,
including women and children, as well as the United
Nations staff who are trying to help them. History will
judge Washington’s actions. They can make as many
cynical, beautiful, empty speeches about democracy,
human rights, women and peace and security, some rules
or other, some order or other, as they like. However, we
witnessed the real value of those words just now, when
two members of the Security Council chose to remain
complicit in Israel’s merciless bloodbath.
I am not saying these words to shame our American
colleagues. I am sure that the outcome of our vote has
reverberated in the hearts of ordinary people in the
United States and the United Kingdom, whose calls for
peace and common sense have gone unheeded by the
ruling elites of those countries. I am confident that they
will now have their say. Nothing remains for us to do in
the Council other than to redouble or triple our efforts
to try to reach a decision that can alleviate the suffering
of civilians — within the limited, toothless framework
that we have left to act in, thanks to Washington and
London. It is important to ensure the implementation
of the Council’s resolution 2712 (2023), regardless of
how we view it. We expect the Secretary-General to
make proposals about how to organize the monitoring
of its implementation as soon as possible. We hope
that at least something will be able to be done within
that framework.
As we have previously proposed, one of the other
options could be to expand the mandate of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization. Besides
that, we expect that the General Assembly will once
again weigh in. We cannot and must not leave innocent
Palestinians and Israelis at the mercy of those for whom
war is a geopolitical game and a source of enrichment.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): More than two months
have passed since Hamas’s terror attack on Israel
on 7 October, followed by Israel’s massive military
response. After several failed attempts, the Security
Council finally spoke on 15 November through its
adoption of resolution 2712 (2023). After that, a hopeful
week-long humanitarian pause in the fighting allowed
more emergency aid to enter through the Rafah crossing
and more than 100 hostages to be released. However,
after the pause broke down, the situation deteriorated
rapidly, with new rounds of deaths, displacement and
destruction. It is clear that more must be done.
We voted in favour of draft resolution S/2023/970,
as the loss of civilian life that we are witnessing
now — Palestinian or Israeli — is tragic. In the
current situation, Japan also takes very seriously the
Secretary-General’s invocation of Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations. We therefore regret
that the draft resolution failed to be adopted. However,
we need to recall that the country that vetoed it is
engaging in enormous diplomatic efforts to make a
tangible difference in improving the humanitarian
situation on the ground. That is why we need more joint
and unceasing efforts to find common ground from
which the Council can work together for the people of
Palestine, as well as those in Israel and beyond, rather
than indulging in finger-pointing. In that regard, I was
therefore disappointed by the statement made by the
speaker immediately preceding me.

S/PV.9499 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 08/12/2023
8/10 23-39552
Though this is a disappointing outcome, Japan will
work constructively with other Council members to
find a path forward.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Albania voted in favour
of draft resolution S/2023/970, on a humanitarian
ceasefire in Gaza, introduced by the United Arab
Emirates, joining the call of the Secretary-General and
the United Nations agencies to end the hostilities on the
ground so that humanitarian access can be delivered
to the population in Gaza and to all the civilians
suffering in this conflict. We strongly support the draft
resolution’s clear focus on the protection of civilians and
the implementation of international humanitarian law.
Let us be clear. We support the call for a
humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza to save civilians — not
to shield Hamas or other terrorists. It therefore cannot
and must not be seen and misused by Hamas as a new
opportunity for regrouping and attacking Israel and its
population. It has been doing that since the 7 October
terrorist attack, and the Security Council has not reacted
to condemn it. It is therefore important for the Council
to start thinking quickly about how to hold Hamas
accountable for the terrorist attacks of 7 October, for
the hostages who have not yet been freed, for the sexual
violence it has used as a weapon of terror and for the
huge damage it has done to the Palestinian cause. The
people of Gaza should reject Hamas and embrace the
path of peace as the only way to build their future. And
the only way to do that is to secure Israel’s right to exist
and its security, on the one hand, and for Palestinians to
have their own State and freedom, on the other.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon voted
in favour of draft resolution S/2023/970, submitted to
us this evening at the initiative of the United Arab
Emirates. We did so out of a sense of responsibility,
because it is time to stop the murderous violence and
intolerable bloodshed among the civilian population.
The Security Council once again failed to move
beyond its divisions to respond unanimously to the
chaotic situation being endured by civilians, women
and children in the ruins of Gaza. To our great regret,
there will be no ceasefire tonight in the war between
Israel and Hamas. There will be no echo on the ground
in response to today’s exceptional and unprecedented
appeal by the Secretary-General through his invocation
of Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which calls for urgent and coordinated action to save
human lives. I am talking about the lives of thousands
of children and women who have no recourse to
anything other than international humanitarian law and
the decisions of the Council.
The Council must draw on the humanity of each
of its members to show that it has intensified its
engagement and to bring an end to the hostilities in
Gaza. The Council must step up its efforts to justify
and live up to its vocation and mandate to stop wars,
if not prevent them. The Council must overcome
differences when faced with tragedy, because it reflects
the universal conscience. There must always be a place
in this Chamber for the rejection of horror, whoever the
perpetrators may be. There must always be a place in this
Chamber for the respect of international humanitarian
law. There must always be a seat around this table from
which to call for a humanitarian ceasefire, and we must
very promptly return to that seat and assume the full
weight of our responsibilities.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): Brazil voted in
favour of the draft resolution proposed by the United
Arab Emirates on behalf of the Group of Arab States
(S/2023/970), which we also co-sponsored. We regret
that it did not receive the necessary approval, despite
the 13 votes in its favour.
The unprecedented level of the humanitarian
tragedy unfolding in Gaza requires urgent action.
It continues to be our responsibility to prevent it.
That should have been done by now, by the Council
demanding an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, the
easing of humanitarian aid and the immediate and
unconditional release of all the hostages. Without
that, the Security Council risks complicity in allowing
further human loss. Sooner or later, Council members
must shoulder their responsibility and do what is right.
That is not just Brazil’s call — they are the demands of
public conscience, the dictates of humanity. The price
of inaction is unbearably high politically, morally and
legally. We might be irreparably harming the prospect
of a two-State solution.
Brazil will continue to work with Council
members with a view to re-establishing the conditions
for humanitarian action to resume in Gaza. We must
also be consequential in our defence of international
law, particularly international humanitarian law,
with meaningful action. There is a pressing need to
re-establish Council authority, which should be guided
by our collective responsibility to ensure peace and
security without making exceptions. Now that we
have failed once again, maybe we could try a more

08/12/2023 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9499
23-39552 9/10
effective negotiating process, which will place the full
responsibility of a draft resolution on all Member States.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Mozambique deeply
regrets that, despite the efforts made by the Security
Council, it was not able to reach a consensus and adopt
the draft resolution before us (S/2023/970), which
was meant to address the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in Gaza.
Mozambique voted in favour of the draft resolution,
hoping that it would lead to an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire, thereby mitigating the suffering of civilians in
the Gaza Strip. The concerning humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip and the suffering of the Palestinian
civilian population cannot be simply ignored by anyone
and most certainly not by the Council. As previously
emphasized, there is an imperative for all parties to
comply with their obligations and international law,
including international humanitarian law, to protect the
population and civilian infrastructure. Mozambique
commends the United Arab Emirates for their efforts
to seek a mutually agreed resolution to the conflict and
to contribute towards peace and security in the Middle
East, particularly between Israel and Palestine. We also
extend our gratitude and unwavering support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General to address the conflict
in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We reaffirm our full support for the efforts aimed
at the cessation of hostilities and the implementation
of the two-State solution in the interest of peace and
security between Israel and Palestine, fostering good-
neighbourly relations and promoting regional harmony,
all in accordance with the principles of the Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in explanation of vote in my capacity as the
representative of Ecuador.
As the President of Ecuador, Daniel Noboa Azín,
said yesterday during his visit to the United Nations, our
country will always be in favour of peace, a ceasefire
and putting an end to violence, not only in Gaza but
in any other area or territory of the world. It is no
coincidence that he is our President and that he presided
over the Security Council yesterday (see S/PV.9497).
We reiterate our full condemnation of the terrorist
acts against friendly countries such as Israel, and we
believe that every civilian who has died in Israel or
Palestine since 7 October represents a tragedy that
makes it more necessary to move towards peace. We
feel that we must act urgently to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe, which, as the Secretary-General is
warning, could have irreversible consequences for
peace and security in the entire region. That is why
we voted in favour of the draft resolution that we
have just considered (S/2023/970), which called for
a humanitarian ceasefire to alleviate the situation
for the civilian population and for an immediate and
unconditional release of all of the hostages. What other
decision could we take, as the country presiding over the
body in charge of maintaining international peace and
security? We did so, furthermore, in the firm belief that
both peoples deserve to live in peace, with security and
dignity, which can only be achieved through a peaceful,
negotiated, definitive and just solution for the parties,
with the existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, on
the basis of the 1967 borders and relevant resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): This is the moment of
truth. This is a turning point in history, and it is beyond
regrettable — it is disastrous — that the Security
Council was again prevented from rising to the moment
to uphold its clear responsibilities in the face of the
grave crisis threatening human lives and regional and
international peace and security. Millions of Palestinian
lives hang in the balance. Every single one of them is
sacred and worth saving.
Instead of allowing the Council to uphold its
mandate by finally making a clear call, after two
months of massacres, for the atrocities to end, the war
criminals are now given more time to perpetuate their
crimes. How can that be justified? How can anyone
justify the slaughter of an entire people? Those who are
advocating for the prolongation of the assault on the
one hand, while also pleading against the commission
of atrocities on the other, should be convinced by now
that the prolongation of this war obviously implies
the continued commission of atrocities, the loss of
more innocent lives and more destruction. They are
inherently linked. That is the way Israel conducts its
war — through atrocities.
Hundreds of people will be killed by this time
tomorrow, then hundreds more and then thousands.
Children will be killed, orphaned, wounded or disabled

S/PV.9499 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 08/12/2023
10/10 23-39552
for life, not by mistake but by design, because the
killers have no regard whatsoever for Palestinian life,
from the cradle to the grave and beyond. Even the
killed are now stacked in mass graves or left for days
and weeks under the rubble, without the dignity of a
burial. More shouts of people still alive will come from
under the rubble, asking to be saved. The humanitarian
catastrophe will reach new and terrifying depths. Who
can justify this? Who can tolerate witnessing more of
these horrors and allowing them to continue? In Gaza,
2.3 million Palestinians are paying with their lives
the price for double standards, bias, racism, Israeli
exceptionalism and supremacy. Whoever is against the
destruction and displacement of the Palestinian people
must stand against this war. And whoever supports it is
enabling this destruction and displacement, regardless
of their intentions or efforts. Only the outcome matters
when so many lives are at stake. Whoever is against
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
must stand against this war. And whoever supports it
is enabling war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, regardless of their intentions or efforts. Only
the outcome matters when so many lives are at stake.
Finally, let me thank the 100 countries that, in less
than a day’s time, rallied to co-sponsor draft resolution
S/2023/970. The number of supporting countries has
increased since my brother from the United Arab
Emirates referred it to the Council. I also want to thank
the members of the Security Council that, with courage
and a sense of humanity and human decency, voted in
favour of the draft resolution. I thank all 13 members
that did so, including you, Mr. President.
Together with all States that have taken a clear and
principled stance, with the Secretary-General, with
civil society and with peoples around the world who are
with us in solidarity, we will spare no effort to put an
end to the slaughter of our people. We will make every
effort to hold those responsible accountable. We will
never relent in our efforts to uphold international law,
nor will we ever relent in championing the rights of our
people and defending our just cause. What is happening
these days will have a decisive impact on the fate of our
region, as well as on the understanding and perception
of every country and relations among communities,
peoples and nations around the world.
This is a terrible day for the Security Council. We
reject this result and will continue resorting to every
legitimate avenue to stop these abhorrent atrocities,
including by resuming the emergency session of the
General Assembly. We demand a ceasefire to save
lives. Every further day means lives lost and people
killed at an unprecedented pace in modern history. It
means barbarism prevailing and humanity abandoned.
Humanity must prevail now — for the sake of the
Palestinian people in Gaza and for the sake of humanity.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
