Statement by H.E. Cho Tae-yul
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
on the Occasion of the G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
(Session 1 - The G20’s role in dealing with the ongoing international tensions)
Rio de Janeiro, February 21, 2024
Thank you, Minister Vieira.
Let me start by thanking you for kindly inviting us to this ‘Marvelous City.’
I would also like to join others’ welcoming the African Union as a new member.
Dear Colleagues,
The G20 is the premier forum for economic cooperation.
However, our ability to cooperate economically and achieve global economic growth rests on the foundations of peace and stability.
As we know all too well,
those foundations are under tremendous stress.
The outbreak of another armed conflict since the last G20 Foreign Ministers’ meeting and its repercussions vividly remind us once again how easily peace can be shattered; how rapidly trade and supply chains can be disrupted; and how seriously our hard-earned progress towards sustainable development can be set back.
Moreover, the impact is disproportionate: the greatest burden is felt by developing countries.
It is against this backdrop that our Leaders reaffirmed their steadfast commitment to peace and stability at the New Delhi G20 Summit last year.
Korea will continue to support efforts to strengthen solidarity and cooperation at the G20 to help achieve that goal under Brazil’s leadership.
Dear Colleagues,
I would like to emphasize three critical issues that demand our undiminished engagement.
First, the war in Ukraine.
Two years into the war, there is no end to the war in sight.
The negative effects, ranging from food and energy insecurity to the humanitarian crisis, continue unabated.
The war must come to an end, and peace must be restored as early as possible.
Korea will stand united with the international community to establish lasting peace in Ukraine.
We will continue to implement the ‘Ukraine Peace and Solidarity Initiative’ which President Yoon Suk Yeol announced during his visit to Kyiv last July.
We will deliver on our pledge to provide 2.3 billion dollars in support to help Ukraine restore peace and rebuild the nation.
We also look forward to working closely with our partners through the ‘Multi-agency Donor Coordination Platform for Ukraine’, which we joined on 14th of February this year.
Second, the situation in the Middle East.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in Gaza and the spread of instability in the region.
The Korean government calls on all relevant parties to comply with their obligations under international law.
Uninterrupted humanitarian access should be guaranteed, and all the remaining hostages should be released.
In the longer run, efforts to establish a lasting peace in the region is vital.
My government supports a two-state solution as the basis for bringing this goal to fruition.
The attacks by the Houthis against vessels in the Red Sea are also deep cause for concern.
Accounting for 30% of global container shipping, the Red Sea is a vital international waterway for energy supply and trade.
Events spiraling out of control could result in another major shock to the global economy.
There must be an end to all acts of provocation jeopardizing not only freedom of navigation but also peace and stability in the region.
Third, North Korea.
North Korea continues to repeatedly and unabashedly violate multiple UN Security Council resolutions as it advances its nuclear and missile programs.
It constantly churns out bellicose statements and engages in provocative behavior.
Pyongyang’s illicit activities pose a threat to peace and stability not only on the Korean Peninsula but throughout the globe.
Indeed, its unlawful military cooperation with Moscow underscores how security in Northeast Asia and security in Europe are increasingly intertwined.
G20 nations must demonstrate leadership in drawing a firm and united response from the broader international community.
In particular, we should redouble our efforts to block key revenue sources for North Korea’s nuclear and missile development.
All nations must fully implement UN Security Council resolutions, including by stopping the employment of North Korean workers, tackling illicit ship-to-ship transfers, and addressing malicious cyber activities.
And we need to step up our efforts to improve the human rights situation in North Korea.
It is through the repression of the rights of its people and the diversion of scarce resources that Pyongyang is able to develop its nuclear and missile programs with impunity at home.
Indeed, Nuclear and human rights problems in North Korea are two sides of the same coin.
Dear Colleagues,
We must not allow our divisions to get in the way of tackling the multitude of tasks that lie ahead.
Accelerating the deployment of zero- and low-emission technologies to combat climate change is imperative.
Korea has been championing the Carbon Free Energy Initiative as part of our efforts to achieve carbon neutrality.
The G20 should also cooperate on international governance for Artificial Intelligence (AI).
Korea aims to contribute to global discussions on AI governance through a series of milestones this year.
We will host the Global AI Forum, back to back with the AI Safety Summit to be co-hosted with the United Kingdom, as well as the REAIM Summit with the Netherlands, focusing on the responsible military use of AI.
There is also a pressing need to make further progress in achieving the SDGs.
The 40 percent increase in our ODA budget this year underscores Korea’s commitment to this end.
To help promote inclusive growth and sustainable development globally, Korea will enhance its engagement with the Global South.
A key example is the first ever Korea-Africa Summit that will be held in Seoul later this year.
Through these efforts and others, Korea will continue to help catalyze cooperation in the G20 as we work together for a successful Summit in November.
Thank you. ###
