Arrest warrants were issued for Netanyahu and his former defence minister and Hamas military chief yesterday. Alamy Stock Photo
International Criminal Court
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban is to invite Netanyahu to visit in defiance of the ICC.
LAST UPDATE | 22 Nov 2024
IRELAND WOULD “ABSOLUTELY” execute the arrest warrant issued against Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu by the International Criminal Court (ICC) yesterday, the Taoiseach and Tánaiste have said separately.
Arrest warrants were issued for Netanyahu and his former defence minister Yoav Gallan and Hamas military chief Mohammed Deif yesterday by the ICC.
While Israel and US President Joe Biden, who are both not signatories of the ICC, have condemned the move, both outgoing Irish leaders have said the State would definitely carry out an arrest.
Speaking this morning on RTÉ Radio One, Taoiseach Simon Harris said if Netanyahu were to arrive in Ireland, he would “absolutely” be arrested. He added that Ireland fully supports international courts and applies their warrants.
Speaking yesterday, Harris added that “those who commit war crimes and crimes against humanity, must be held fully to account”. The Fine Gael leader said that anyone in a position to assist the court “must now do so with urgency”.
(L-R) Tánaiste Micheál Martin and Taoiseach Simon Harris. Alamy Alamy
Meanwhile, Tánaiste Micheál Martin also told Newstalk Breakfast that Ireland would execute the warrant. He said that he believed “war crimes” have been committed in Gaza.
“What’s happening in northern Gaza at the moment is absolutely horrific and it is resulting in the forced expulsion of the population in northern Gaza,” the Fianna Fáil leader said.
He added that the government and public are receiving images of deceased families, including women and children. “It is a collective punishment of the people. They are war crimes. It’s genocidal,” he added.
Biden last night denounced the arrest warrants issued the Israeli Prime Minister and former defence minister. He said the move against his allies was “outrageous” and restated the US’ commitment to Israel.
Biden, left, with Netanyahu, right, during meeting in Tel Aviv on 18 October 2023 Alamy File Photo Alamy File Photo
Israel’s closest allies slammed the warrants against the Israeli politicians, and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban, whose country holds the EU’s rotating presidency, today said he would invite Netanyahu to visit in defiance of the ICC arrest warrant.
“Later today, I will invite the Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Netanyahu, to visit Hungary, where I will guarantee him, if he comes, that the judgment of the International Criminal Court will have no effect in Hungary, and that we will not follow its terms”, Orban told state radio.
File image of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban (R) and Benjamin Netanyahu at a press conference in Budapest, Hungary, on 18 July, 2017 Alamy Stock Photo Alamy Stock Photo
Rights groups including Amnesty International welcomed them, labelling Netanyahu a “wanted man”.
The ICC’s move theoretically limits the movement of Netanyahu, as any of the court’s 124 national members would be obliged to arrest him on their territory.
“The Chamber issued warrants of arrest for two individuals, Mr Benjamin Netanyahu and Mr Yoav Gallant, for crimes against humanity and war crimes committed from at least 8 October 2023 until at least 20 May 2024,” the ICC said in a statement.
A warrant had also been issued for Deif, it added.
The court said it had issued the arrest warrant as the prosecutor had not been able to determine whether or not Deif was dead.
The court’s chief prosecutor Karim Khan urged the body’s members to act on the warrants, and for non-members to work together for “upholding international law”.
- includes reporting by © AFP 2024
