Acting on the recommendations of its Second Committee (Economic and Financial), the General Assembly today adopted 39 resolutions — eight by recorded vote — and two decisions on topics ranging from Palestinian natural resources, entrepreneurship and small island States to international trade, adverse climate impacts and global tax cooperation.
Under the theme “Fostering resilience and growth in an uncertain world”, speakers during the Committee’s general debate said the global economy is grappling with sluggish, uneven growth, rising geo-economic fragmentation and crippling debt. Against this backdrop, exacerbated by heightened conflict and climate disasters, discussions underscored the need for poverty eradication, affordable development financing, climate mitigation and resilience, international financial system reform and higher quality education in putting derailed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) back on track.
Stefany Veiga Romero (Uruguay), Rapporteur of the Second Committee, introduced that body’s reports (A/79/434 to A/79/447), which contained 39 draft resolutions and two draft decisions recommended to the Assembly for adoption. Noting that finding consensus on negotiated texts in this year’s session was more challenging than previous ones, she said delegations nevertheless demonstrated strong commitment to achieving the best outcome.
Amid escalating tensions in the Middle East, related drafts gave rise to heated debates in the Committee, including one titled “Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources” (report A/79/445), which was adopted by a recorded vote of 162 in favour to 8 against (Argentina, Canada, Israel, Federated States of Micronesia, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Nauru, United States), with 10 abstentions (Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Fiji, Kiribati, Panama, Paraguay, Rwanda, Togo, Tonga).
By its terms, the Assembly demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, cease the exploitation, damage, cause of loss or depletion and endangerment of natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan. On that text, Israel’s delegate emphasized in the Committee that “tragically every resource meant to benefit the Palestinians has been co-opted for Hamas war machinery”. Countering, the observer of the State of Palestine stressed that her people are “living through a nightmare”, while Israel acts as a State above the law with brazen impunity, classifying all Palestinians as terrorists to justify its acts.
A further text on “Entrepreneurship for sustainable development” (report A/79/437 — Draft resolution II) was adopted in a recorded vote of 146 in favour to 30 against, with 7 abstentions (Angola, China, Mauritania, Namibia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Türkiye). By its terms, the Assembly stressed the positive role that entrepreneurship plays in driving job creation, reducing inequalities and expanding opportunities.
Introduced by Israel’s delegate, the draft similarly sparked debate during Committee deliberations. Lebanon’s delegate lamented that, while the draft highlights equal opportunities and poverty eradication, Israel continues to destroy vital Palestinian and Lebanese infrastructure. The observer of the State of Palestine stressed that Israel is denying Palestinians the rights to life, self-determination and freedom, while South Africa’s delegate posed the question: “What entrepreneurial opportunities do the people of Gaza have under the onslaught they face?”
Among several texts addressing sustainable development was “Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind” (report A/79/437/Add.4), which was adopted without a vote. By the text, the Assembly expressed profound alarm that emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally, expressing concern that countries are already experiencing an increase in adverse impacts due to climate change. Prior to the adoption, the Assembly retained operative paragraph 16 by a recorded vote of 113 in favour to 53 against, with 5 abstentions (Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Equatorial Guinea, Honduras).
On that draft, speakers in the Committee stressed the need for rapid and sustained reductions of greenhouse gases, expressing regret over the lack of readiness and political will from some delegations to abide by agreements reached. Fiji’s delegate lamented that the text’s language may not be “as ambitious as we would have wanted”, but noted that it provides a minimum benchmark in the collective pursuit to address climate change.
Another text under that agenda item, adopted without a vote, was “Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS [small island developing States] Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” (report A/79/437/Add.2). By its terms, the Assembly called on the international community to take urgent and concrete action to address vulnerabilities of small island developing States and seek solutions to major challenges facing them.
Under macroeconomic policy questions, the Assembly adopted a text on “International trade and development” (report A/79/435/Add.1) by a recorded vote of 132 in favour to 3 against (United States, Israel, Argentina), with 48 abstentions. By its terms, the Assembly underscored the urgent need to keep markets, including for food, fertilizer and agriculture, open, equitable, transparent, non-discriminatory and predictable through reform of multilateral trade rules on agriculture. Speaking after the vote, Belarus’ delegate disassociated from operative paragraph 9.
Addressing that draft, South Africa’s delegate stressed that punitive trade measures devastated developing countries, increasing poverty and unemployment as well as negatively impacting efforts to cut harmful emissions. Adding that developing States are least responsible for climate change, he said developed States should supply poorer nations with the means to mitigate climate instead of “bludgeoning us with a big stick”.
Addressing globalization and independence, a text titled “Towards a New International Economic Order” (report A/79/439) was adopted by a recorded vote of 133 in favour to 51 against, with 2 abstentions (Armenia, Türkiye). By its terms, the Assembly called on States to strengthen cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and expressed concern over increasing debt as well as negative capital flows in developing countries, fluctuation of exchange and interest rates and tightening of global financial conditions.
By a further text adopted without a vote on “Information and communications technologies (ICT) for sustainable development” (report A/79/434), the Assembly stressed the importance of rapid technological change in ensuring food security and nutrition by 2030, and information technology in agriculture systems with due regard for sustainability. Prior to adoption, it decided to retain preambular paragraph 22 in a recorded vote of 116 in favour to 56 against, with 4 abstentions (United Republic of Tanzania, Singapore, Honduras, Costa Rica). It further opted to retain preambular paragraph 34 in a recorded vote of 121 in favour to 53 against, with no abstentions.
A text titled “Women in development” (report A/79/441/Add.3), which sparked debate in the Committee, was adopted without a vote. By its terms, the Assembly reaffirmed that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls and full realization of their human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development.
Several delegates during Committee deliberations said the draft failed to represent women’s part in economic, social and environmental issues. Cameroon’s delegate objected to the term “multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination”, also stressing that reproductive health can only be considered “healthcare” when approved by Member States and that the word “gender” refers exclusively to a person’s biological sex.
Without a vote, the Assembly also adopted “Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all” (report A/79/437/Add.9). The text underscored the importance of access to cleaner, more efficient and sustainable cooking and heating methods, calling for the promotion of an enabling environment at national and international levels for increased usage of these methods, particularly in developing States.
On that draft, Péter Szijjártó, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hungary, noted in the Assembly the radical increase in global demand for electricity, warning of environmental destruction and “humanitarian catastrophe” if the international community fails to progress on the issue. Calling for an increase in nuclear generational capacities for East-to-West cooperation, he rejected all initiatives or unilateral measures against that type of energy, which would constitute an attack on national sovereignty.
Also addressing a draft on “Immigration and development” (A/79/439/Add.2), adopted with a vote, Mr. Szijjártó told the Assembly that more than 120 million people have been displaced over the past 10 years. While they are entitled under international law to stay in the “first safe country” they arrive in, they are not allowed in subsequent ones, he said, which constitutes a security issue and a crime.
Finally, the Assembly adopted without a vote two decisions (report A/79/446), one titled “Revitalization of the work of the Second Committee” and the other “Draft programme of work of the Second Committee for the eightieth session of the General Assembly”.
The Assembly postponed action on two draft resolutions — relating to international tax cooperation and illicit financial flows — to allow time for review of their programme budget implications by the Fifth Committee (Administrative and Budgetary).
Of the remaining drafts, it adopted by recorded vote texts on globalization and interdependence (retaining by recorded vote preambular paragraph 12), poverty eradication, Lebanese oil slick and the Caribbean Sea (retaining preambular paragraph 10 by recorded vote).
The Assembly adopted additional sustainable development texts without a vote on consumption and production, disaster risk reduction, desertification, biological diversity, the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), harmony with nature, sand and dust storms and the social and solidarity economy. It adopted additional macroeconomic policy drafts on the international financial system, external debt, illicit financial flows and investments for sustainable development.
Further texts were adopted without a vote on financing for development, UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), least developed States, landlocked developing countries, tourism, industrial development, human resources, operational activities, South-South cooperation, agriculture development and global partnerships.
In other business, the Assembly took up a draft titled “Graduation of Cambodia and Senegal from the least developed country category” (document A/79/L.42), which was introduced by Uganda’s delegate for the “Group of 77” and China.
Adopting the resolution without a vote, the organ reaffirmed that graduating from the category of least developed countries should not result in disruption or reversal of development plans, programmes and projects. It also took note of the Committee for Development Policy’s finding that a five-year preparatory period would be necessary for all countries recommended for graduation at the 2024 triennial review to effectively prepare for a smooth transition, and decided to provide Cambodia and Senegal, on an exceptional basis, with a five-year preparatory period leading thereto.
Prior to acting on the decision “Participation of non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector in the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development” (document A/79/L.44), the Assembly considered an amendment to it. Introducing the amendment (document A/79/L.50), Canada’s delegate said civil society voices must be heard on “an issue as important as FFD [Financing for Development]”. Expressing regret that some Member States continuously use the nonobjection procedure to unilaterally block stakeholders and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), she said the text seeks to restore the original list of civil society organizations excluded from participating in the forum.
Speaking before the vote, the delegates of the Russian Federation and China underscored the importance of the no-objection principle, noting that the amendment undermines it, with the former expressing concern on participation in the Fourth Financing for Development Conference of 13 NGOs, who “prefer to focus on biased and sponsored political assessments regarding international conflicts” and specialize in promoting gender issues and even the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons agenda rather than the question of financing for development.
Speaking for the European Union in its capacity as observer, Sweden’s delegate said active participation of all stakeholders will contribute to the legitimacy of the process and reaching an ambitious outcome. She urged States to support and facilitate participation of all stakeholders in line with the spirit and letter of modalities adopted by the Assembly.
Mexico’s delegate said that only through a truly inclusive and representative participation incorporating perspectives of all sectors of society can the process and outcome documents reflect the international community’s needs.
The Assembly adopted the amendment in a recorded vote of 73 in favour to 23 against, with 49 abstentions. It then adopted “L.44” as amended, by which the organ decided to approve participation of NGOs, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector, as listed in the annex to the present decision in the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development and its preparatory process.
The Assembly then adopted by consensus “Promoting and fostering the efficiency, accountability, effectiveness and transparency of public administration by strengthening supreme audit institutions” (document A/79/L.46), which was introduced by Brazil’s delegate.
By its terms, it encouraged Member States and relevant UN institutions to intensify cooperation with the international organization of supreme audit institutions through training and technical assistance; consider climate-related findings and recommendations in the reports of supreme audit institutions; and strengthen capacities of their supreme audit institutions to audit national climate-related policies expenditures and actions.
The Assembly then turned to “Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the obligations of Israel in relation to the presence and activities of the United Nations, other international organizations and third States” (document A/79/L.28/Rev.1).
“The civilian population trapped in the Occupied Palestinian Territory is trapped in a living nightmare,” said Norway’s delegate, introducing the draft. While recognizing that States may take different positions on what has caused this, he emphasized that they must agree on the humanitarian imperative to provide aid to those in need. Under no circumstances can it be tolerated that any State imposes obstructions and impediments to organizations that provide humanitarian and development assistance to civilians. “Yet, this is exactly what is happening,” he said, stressing that aid workers are being targeted and aid delivery systematically disrupted.
“We can no longer tolerate impediments that hinder humanitarian access and disrupt planned operations for Palestinians under illegal occupation,” he stressed. He voiced particular concern over the Israeli legislation that targets the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which — if implemented – will effectively end the Agency’s operations in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and, in turn, collapse the UN’s humanitarian response.
Before the vote, the delegate of the United States noted that the proposed referral “brings us no closer to a lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians” and will not improve the lives of Palestinians in Gaza. While stressing that UNRWA’s personnel must enjoy freedom of movement, he said this draft fails to address credible allegations about the activities of some of its personnel. For this, his country will vote against the text.
“The Middle East is changing before our eyes — Hamas is being dismantled, Hizbullah humiliated and Assad has fallen,” said Israel’s delegate, adding that “the terror network that once cast a shadow over our region is being erased”. Painting a picture of a future of stability, “free from the murderous Iranian regime”, he rejected weaponization of the International Court of Justice.
The Assembly then adopted by a recorded vote of 137 in favour to 12 against, with 22 abstentions, the resolution “L.28/Rev.1”. By its terms, the Assembly decided to request the International Court of Justice, on a priority basis and with utmost urgency, render an advisory opinion on the obligations of Israel — as an occupying Power and as a member of the UN — in relation to the presence and activities of the UN, including its agencies and bodies, other international organizations and third States, in and in relation to the Occupied Palestinian Territory. This includes ensuring and facilitating the unhindered provision of urgently needed supplies essential to the survival of the Palestinian civilian population as well as basic services and humanitarian and development assistance, for the benefit of the Palestinian civilian population, and in support of their right to self-determination.
Also today, the Assembly decided to unanimously elect Brazil, Cambodia, Egypt, Morocco and Uganda as members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission to fill five vacant seats on the Commission for a two-year term of office beginning 1 January 2025.
NEW – Follow real-time meetings coverage on our LIVE blog.
