1. Med shot, WHO personnel checking paperwork
2. Med shot, Abdulrahman looking off camera
3. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Asma, mother of patient Abdulrahman Al-Nashash:
“We were displaced in an UNRWA school. The school was bombed and my son was selling on a stall and he lost his leg.”
4. Close up, Abdulrahman’s amputated leg
5. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Asma, mother of patient Abdulrahman Al-Nashash:
“I went to the American Hospital in Deir al-Balah. They operated on him, and they told me that his leg is irreparable. Therefore, they amputated his leg.”
6. Med shot, Abdulrahman’s amputated leg, holding a crutch leaning in his hand
7. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Asma, mother of patient Abdulrahman Al-Nashash:
“His psychological state was very bad to the point he started pulling his hair and hitting himself hard. He became like someone who has depression; seeing his friends playing and running around learning, and he’s sitting alone, also his father died in this war.”
8. Close up, Asma’s phone showing a photo of Abdulrahman before his injury
9. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Asma, mother of patient Abdulrahman Al-Nashash:
“I am very happy that my son is going to Jordan for treatment, may God bless them. I am very happy, I want to stand by my son until he’s treated, healthy, and able to stand on his own feet, go and buy things that we need, and play football.”
10. Med shot, Asma in the foreground and Abdulrahman in the background
11. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Abdulrahman Al-Nashash, patient:
“I am very happy my name is on the list. I will travel. I will get treatment and be able to go play with my friends and go to school again.”
12. Wide shot, Khadija and Mohammed sitting and waiting
13. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Khadija, Mother of patient Mohammed Siyam:
“My son Mohammad Siyam has neck, throat and lung cancer. He’s extremely tired and sick, he needs chemotherapy and radiation sessions.”
14. Wide shot, Khadija and Mohammed talking
15. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Khadija, Mother of patient Mohammed Siyam:
“He’s very tired and basically been living on painkillers, we looked all over the place in all almost all pharmacies for painkillers to find them. He’s living on painkillers, suffering pain and fever with 42 degrees, he suffers a lot, and at night he wouldn’t sleep because of the pain.”
16. Med shot, Mohammed looking off camera
17. Med shot, Mohammed’s hands
18. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Khadija, Mother of patient Mohammed Siyam:
“I was very happy to hear that he’s getting treated outside, and the boy felt extremely happy that he’s getting treated. Because obviously there’s no treatment for him here.”
19. Med shot, WHO personnel checking patient and companion documents
20. Med shot, Mena, lying on a stretcher in an ambulance, with WHO personnel in the foreground
21. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Afaf, companion of patient Mena Aql:
“We were forced to travel to Jordan for Mena’s treatment as a result of the bombing of the house; Mena had fractures in both legs, which led to bone inflammation and the installation of Ilizarov apparatus (External fixation device).”
22. Med shot, Mena lying on a stretcher in an ambulance
23. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Afaf, companion of patient Mena Aql:
“God willing, we are now on our way to travel to Jordan for treatment. God willing, our Lord will make our path easy and we will travel from there so that she can receive treatment and return healthy, walking on both legs. Thank you all.”
24. Close up, Mena lying on a stretcher in an ambulance
25. Various shots, people saying goodbye, and patients’ and companions’ names being checked before boarding buses
26. Wide shot, internal shot of a bus, full of patients and companions, with WHO personnel checking paperwork
27. SOUNDBITE (Arabic) Asma, mother of patient Abdulrahman Al-Nashash:
“We are now on the bus heading to Kerem Shalom crossing point. I am very happy that the World Health Organization submitted my son’s application for treatment abroad, thank you very much.”
28. Various shots, the evacuation convoy, with family members waving goodbye, buses and ambulances leaving the hospital towards the Kerem Shalom crossing
View moreView less
