Updated / Friday, 5 Jun 2026 20:42
Getty
Israeli ministers Itamar Ben-Gvir (L) and Bezalel Smotrich have been banned from travelling to Ireland
Minister for Justice Jim O'Callaghan has introduced travel bans on Israeli ministers Itamar Ben-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich, Taoiseach Micheál Martin has confirmed.
Mr Ben-Gvir is the Israeli national security minister while Mr Smotrich is the minister for finance.
The Taoiseach was speaking at the EU-Western Balkans Summit in the city of Tivat in Montenegro.
Mr Martin said the ministers actions and words "amount to a desire to see the elimination of Palestinians from Palestine".
He added that he believes that there should be further EU measures introduced against them.
We need your consent to load this rte-player contentWe use rte-player to manage extra content that can set cookies on your device and collect data about your activity. Please review their details and accept them to load the content.Manage Preferences
"That's again something that the international community needs to take on board and we will be pursuing that with others.
"In my view, their behaviour justifies sanctions at EU level as well, and that’s something that we will raise, whether we can get sufficient support across the European Union is a different matter," he said.
In a statement, a spokesperson for Minister O'Callaghan said the travel bans on the two Israeli ministers are in place after they were agreed by Government outside of a Cabinet decision this week.
"In line with the Taoiseach's statement that Ireland will act to prevent those members of the government of Israel who have been instrumental in fomenting the unfolding disaster in Gaza from entering our country, the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration has instructed immigration officers to refuse entry to Itamar Ben-Gvir the minister for national security of Israel, and Bezalel Smotrich, the minister for finance of Israel, should they seek to enter."
Watch: Behaviour of Israeli ministers 'justifies sanctions' - Taoiseach
It is understood the travel ban was agreed earlier this week and that the decision does not need to go to Cabinet for approval.
France announced last month that it had banned Mr Ben-Gvir from entering the country for a video mocking activists seized by Israeli soldiers on a Gaza-bound aid flotilla.
Spain, France and Italy have all called on the European Union to sanction Mr Ben-Gvir.
Mr Martin and Minister for Foreign Affairs Helen McEntee last month condemned the video footage shared by Mr Ben-Gvir.
France has also opened an investigation into alleged "war crime" and "torture" over Israel's treatment of French activists who took part in the flotilla, a prosecutor's office said today.
The probe was opened at the government's request, the national counterterrorism prosecutor's office (PNAT) said, after activists accused Israeli authorities of mistreatment during their detention last month.
Separately, the Taoiseach suggested that he did not want to see the Republic of Ireland soccer team disadvantaged following mounting pressure on the FAI to boycott its upcoming fixture with Israel.
Mr Martin said the fixture was something that lay in the hands of FIFA and he indicated that the Irish Government did not have a role to play.
He said the best way to highlight Israel's actions was to get agreement on the issue at EU level and to get the US to apply pressure on Israel too.
