Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9552
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9552nd meeting
Tuesday, 20 February 2024, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guyana)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bendjama
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Montalvo Sosa
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamazaki
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kanu
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Žbogar
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-04552 (E)
*2404552*

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
2/21 24-04552
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Egypt, Israel, Qatar and Tunisia to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in the
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2024/173, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): I wish to extend my
sincere appreciation for your efforts, Madam President,
in convening this meeting to deliberate and take action
on draft resolution S/2024/173.
The draft resolution under consideration is the
culmination of extensive discussions among Security
Council members. As the primary custodian of
international peace and security, the Council cannot
afford passivity in the face of the calls for a ceasefire
in Gaza. By presenting this text, our intention is to
empower the Council to fulfil its mandate and protect
lives, commencing with an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire. Ample time was afforded for Council
members to deliberate on the contents of the text. Our
approach involved meticulous consideration of received
proposals and amendments, resulting in what we believe
is a balanced text capable of garnering broad support.
The draft resolution underscores key elements,
including: first, a humanitarian ceasefire; secondly,
unhindered aid delivery to all parts of the Gaza Strip;
thirdly, the rejection of the forced displacement of
Palestinians; fourthly, compliance with the provisional
measures ordered by the International Court of
Justice; and fifthly, and lastly, the imperative for all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Throughout the process, we heard calls for giving
time to a parallel track in order to preserve its chances,
with concerns raised that any action from the Council
would jeopardize that effort. However, almost one
month after the International Court of Justice issued its
orders, there are still no signs of hope for improvement
in the situation in Gaza. Silence, we contend, is not a
viable option. Now is the time for action and the time
for truth.
The members of the Security Council have a
responsibility to vote in favour of measures that uphold
international peace and security. The draft resolution
takes a stance for truth and humanity and stands against
the advocates for murder and hatred. A vote in favour of
it is a demonstration of support for Palestinians’ right to
life. Conversely, voting against it implies an endorsement
of the brutal violence and collective punishment that
are being inflicted on them. A vote in favour of the
draft brings hope for hundreds of thousands of children
to return to school and enjoy their right to education.
Conversely, voting against the draft resolution is a vote
in favour of annihilating their dreams of a better life. A
vote in favour of the draft resolution stands in solidarity
with the rights of Palestinian women, while opposing it
means accepting degrading practices that destroy their
dignity. Furthermore, supporting the draft resolution
means endorsing the Palestinians’ right to food, while
rejecting it constitutes an approval of starvation as
a means of war against hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians. A vote in favour of the draft resolution
is a defence of the right to health care, while voting
against it is an approval of the violation of the sanctity
of hospitals and a death sentence for those who escaped
it in the first place.
The Council must not merely call for a ceasefire — it
must ensure steadfast adherence to it by all parties.
The international community must act swiftly, because
the value of a ceasefire diminishes with each passing
moment. We are rapidly approaching a critical juncture
where the call to halt the machinery of violence will
lose its significance. Today every Palestinian is a target
for death, extermination and genocide. We should
all ask ourselves how many innocent lives must be

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 3/21
sacrificed before the Council deems it necessary to call
for a ceasefire. For us, and I hope for every Security
Council member, Palestinians and Palestinian lives
matter. Every one of us must decide where to stand in
this tragic chapter of history.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): For months, the United States has tirelessly
pushed towards a goal to which all of us should
aspire — a sustainable resolution of the Gaza conflict
so that Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side
and enjoy equal measures of security, dignity and
freedom. To build towards that future, the United
States is working on a hostage deal between Israel
and Hamas, along with Egypt and Qatar. That hostage
deal would bring an immediate and sustained period
of calm to Gaza for at least six weeks, and from there
we could take the time to build a more enduring peace.
President Biden has had multiple calls in recent days
with Prime Minister Netanyahu, as well as the leaders
of Egypt and Qatar, to push that deal forward. Though
gaps remain, the key elements are on the table so that
if an arrangement is reached, it will help to create the
conditions for a sustainable cessation of hostilities,
which I know all of us would like to see.
Of course we want the deal to happen as soon as
possible, as our exhaustive efforts have shown. But
sometimes hard diplomacy takes more time than any of
us might like. Believe me, I understand the desire for
the Council to act urgently and to positively shape the
situation in line with the Security Council’s mandate.
But that desire cannot blind us to the reality of the
situation on the ground. It cannot come at the expense
of undermining the only — let me repeat, only — path
available towards a longer, durable peace. That is why
we have all heard me say over and over again that any
action that the Council takes right now should help, not
hinder, those sensitive and ongoing negotiations.
We believe that the draft resolution on the table right
now (S/2024/173) would in fact negatively impact those
negotiations. Demanding an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire without an agreement requiring Hamas to
release the hostages will not bring about a durable peace.
Instead, it could extend the fighting between Hamas
and Israel, extend the hostages’ time in captivity, an
experience described by former hostages as hell, and
extend the dire humanitarian crisis that Palestinians
are facing in Gaza. None of us want that. I therefore
reiterate the United States belief that while numerous
parties are engaging in sensitive negotiations, now is
not the time for this draft resolution, which jeopardizes
those efforts.
I have communicated our concerns publicly
and privately over the past several weeks. We have
submitted numerous rounds of edits. All were ignored.
Therefore, for that reason, the United States has offered
an alternative draft resolution that would do what the
text before us does not: pressure Hamas to take the
hostage deal that is on the table and help secure a pause
that allows humanitarian assistance to reach Palestinian
civilians in desperate need.
Once again, there is much more we all agree on,
and the alternative draft resolution put forward by the
United States is rooted in those shared beliefs. To start,
in line with President Biden’s comments last week, our
text calls for a temporary ceasefire in Gaza, as soon as
practicable, based on the formula of all hostages being
released. Last I checked, no one here opposes that. A
majority of us also agree that it is time for the Council
to condemn Hamas. We know because members
provided that feedback to Russia on its draft statement
by the President of the Security Council and to Algeria
on its draft resolution — feedback that was inexplicably
ignored. Should the United States draft resolution be
adopted, it would be the first to condemn Hamas for
the abhorrent attacks of 7 October, including the sexual
violence documented that day. The United States text
also makes clear that Hamas has no place in the future
governance of Gaza, and neither does Hamas represent
the dignity or self-determination of the Palestinian
people, which, once again, I believe are all things we
agree on. In addition, our draft resolution states that
there can be no reduction of territory in the Gaza Strip
and rejects, as we did before in resolution 2720 (2023),
any forced displacements of civilians in Gaza. It also
highlights the concerns that many Council members
have regarding the fate of civilians in Rafah, making
it clear that, under the current circumstances, a major
ground offensive into Rafah should not proceed.
This is not, as some members have claimed, an
American effort to cover for an imminent ground
incursion. Rather, it is a sincere statement of our concern
for the 1.5 million civilians who have sought refuge in
Rafah. Civilians must be protected and have access to
humanitarian assistance and basic services. On that
note, our text outlines a path for the implementation
of resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023), including
provisions that call for the expansion of aid at scale.
It also further clarifies and strengthens the mandate

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
4/21 24-04552
of the Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction
Coordinator for Gaza, Sigrid Kaag, whose plan I
know we all support. As in previous resolutions, it
places emphasis on the protection of civilians and
humanitarian workers, and it calls for lifting all barriers
to the provision of humanitarian assistance, opening
additional humanitarian routes and keeping current
border-crossings open. Our draft resolution also aims
to support the Secretary-General’s effort to investigate
the personnel of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East who
directly participated in 7 October, and it supports the
work of the independent review group, led by Catherine
Colonna, focused on ensuring the Agency’s neutrality.
Those and other steps are necessary to restore donor
confidence. Finally, and as always, the draft resolution
reiterates our unwavering commitment to the vision of
the two-State solution, whereby two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace within
secure and recognized borders under a revamped and
revitalized Palestinian Authority.
The United States draft resolution reflects the many
ideas that have been shared over the past month but that
are not reflected in the text before us today. And we
believe that it will both support the ongoing negotiations
and lay the groundwork for a sustainable peace in the
region. But, in addition to getting the “what” of the text
correct, we also know that it is critical to get the “how”
and “when” of it right too. We will work in earnest in
negotiating such a text and, indeed, intend to leave
time for everyone to comment, rather than impose an
arbitrary deadline for the vote.
We are at a pivotal and critical moment: critical for
the hostages, who have been held captive for almost 20
weeks in Gaza, and critical for their families, who are
desperate to be reunited with their loved ones; critical
for Palestinians whose homes and families have been
destroyed and who now wonder where they will find
their next meal; critical for Israelis, many of whom are
still displaced or face barrages of rocket fire; critical
for Palestinian civilians in the West Bank, who are at
heightened risk of extremist settler violence; critical
for humanitarian workers and journalists, who put their
lives on the line every day to do their jobs; and critical
to everyone who desperately wants to see sustainable
peace in the region. That includes, I believe, every
single person in this Chamber. Let us therefore commit
to doing this the right way and at the right time so that
we can create the right conditions for a safer, more
peaceful future.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For the past five months, unprecedented
violence has been unleashed in Gaza, the scale of
which has surpassed any conflict faced by humankind
since the Second World War. The civilian death toll
has reached the shocking threshold of 30,000, and not
all of the victims have been counted. During all that
time, the Security Council has been unable to adopt
a critically important draft resolution demanding an
immediate ceasefire. I would like to recall that on
16 October 2022, when Russia submitted the very first
draft resolution (S/2023/772) calling for such action,
the Palestinian death toll was approximately 1,000. At
that time, Western delegations in the Council chose
to collectively abstain so as not to incur the wrath
of Washington.
It is no exaggeration to say that the recent death
toll of more than 28,000 has been the cost of that initial
disgraceful inability to act, which is the collective
irresponsibility of Western delegations at the Security
Council, whose NATO solidarity outweighs any
lofty national declarations on their commitment to
international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians and humanitarian personnel. Since then,
the United States has exercised its right of the veto
three times to prevent the Council from adopting a
draft resolution demanding a ceasefire. Each time, we
heard the same hypocritical calls from the American
delegation to wait a little longer and give time for
their supposedly effective bilateral diplomacy on the
ground. But it led to no results. And it would have
been impossible for results to materialize because
Washington’s ultimate goal is not peace in the Middle
East or the protection of civilians, but to secure its
geopolitical interests, which require covering for
its closest Middle East ally at all costs. That is why,
after having pushed through in resolution 2720 (2023)
a veritable license for Israel to kill Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories under the pretext of
creating the conditions for a cessation of hostilities, as
we had warned, the United States continues to cover
for the authorities of West Jerusalem and maintain their
impunity for numerous crimes against the people of
Gaza at the international level.
On behalf of the Group of Arab States, the
delegation of Algeria proposed a robust and balanced
draft resolution (S/2024/173) that focuses on the long-

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 5/21
awaited ceasefire. Our Algerian colleagues organized
the negotiation process in good faith, consulted with
all delegations and tried to take their comments into
account to the greatest extent possible. We should
like to especially commend the professionalism of the
Algerian negotiating team. However, this time, from the
very beginning, the United States delegation effectively
made an ultimatum, which demanded a halt to working
on the document. Our American colleagues asserted that
the draft resolution proposed by Algeria is dangerous
because it could interfere with delicate diplomacy on
the ground, and we just heard the same thing again in
this Chamber. I urge everyone to consider the cynicism
of that argument. Washington is effectively saying that
the Security Council is standing in the way of its plans
and demanding that the Council not interfere with them.
Yesterday my American colleague stated publicly that
she would vote against the Algerian draft resolution.
Time after time, the United States has shown
complete disregard for international institutions,
multilateral diplomacy and international law. Today the
authority of the Security Council is essentially at stake.
We call on Council members to demonstrate solidarity
to counter the arbitrary actions of Washington, which
is willing to make any sacrifice in any region in order
to realize its geopolitical ambitions. The United States
Government cares neither for the lives of Gazans nor
for the views of its own people, who have become
increasingly vocal in their support for the Palestinian
people. I hope that other members of the Council are
still willing to listen, if not to the voice of conscience,
at least to public opinion. And public opinion will no
longer forgive the United Nations for its inaction.
The situation in the southern part of the Gaza Strip
around the city of Rafah is extremely dangerous in the
context of Israel’s military plans. Their implementation
would lead to a catastrophic expansion of the scale of
the humanitarian disaster, with Rafah at its epicentre,
given that 1 million residents of the Gaza Strip have
fled the hostilities to that city on the border with Egypt.
Everything possible must be done to ensure that does
not happen. Our shared task is to end the bloodshed
as soon as possible and provide conditions for the
establishment of reliable channels for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the people in this enclave.
We urge the members of the Council to vote in favour
of the Algerian draft resolution.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, China, Ecuador, France, Guyana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Switzerland
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution was not adopted, owing to the negative vote
of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Over the past few weeks, we have made
it incredibly clear that the draft resolution that the
Security Council just voted on (S/2024/173) would not
achieve the goal of a sustainable peace and could in
fact run counter to it. Proceeding with a vote today
was wishful and irresponsible. And while we therefore
cannot support a draft resolution that would put sensitive
negotiations in jeopardy, we look forward to engaging
on a text that we believe will address so many of the
concerns we all share — a text that can and should be
adopted by the Council so that we can have a temporary
ceasefire as soon as is practicable, based on a formula
whereby all hostages would be released.
A temporary ceasefire is critical to getting aid
into the hands of Palestinian civilians who desperately
need it. We should look towards a text that will enable
us to finally condemn Hamas for its horrific attacks
on 7 October, which set this conflict in motion, and
to empower Senior Coordinator Kaag and the United
Nations, because her success is the success of this
Organization, and because it is needed so badly in
order to ensure that civilians get the aid they need more
efficiently and effectively, and that they get more of
it — period. We need it to ensure that ultimately we can
work together to help create a future in which Israelis
and Palestinians live in States of their own, side by side,

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
6/21 24-04552
in peace. We are committed to engaging constructively
to that end on our draft resolution with all Council
members in the coming days, and we will continue to
engage tirelessly in direct diplomacy and negotiations
on the ground.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2024/173, and we
are deeply dissatisfied and disappointed that the United
States vetoed it. Algeria submitted the draft resolution
on behalf of the Arab States, demanding an immediate
ceasefire in Gaza, the immediate release of all hostages,
guaranteed access for humanitarian assistance and
a rejection of forced displacement. That is urgently
required by the situation on the ground and is also
based on the minimum requirements for humanity. It
deserves the support of all the members of the Security
Council. Algeria displayed a rational, sincere and open
attitude and held lengthy and extensive consultations
with all parties on the draft resolution. It also took on
board many constructive ideas designed to make the
text more balanced.
The outcome of today’s vote clearly shows that
where the issue of a ceasefire to halt the fighting in
Gaza is concerned, it is not that the Security Council
does not have an overwhelming consensus, but rather
that the United States exercise of its veto power has
stifled that consensus. The United States veto sends
the wrong message and renders the situation in Gaza
more dangerous. Meanwhile, as the draft resolution is
being vetoed, innocent people in Gaza continue to be
killed in the fighting and are struggling on the brink of
death. The United States claim that the draft resolution
would interfere with the ongoing diplomatic efforts is
totally untenable. Given the situation on the ground, the
continued passive avoidance of an immediate ceasefire
is tantamount to giving a green light to continued
slaughter. While the draft resolution is being vetoed,
the spillover of the conflict continues to destabilize
the entire Middle East, increasing the risk of a wider
war. Only extinguishing the flames of war in Gaza will
prevent the fires of hell from engulfing the entire region.
The Security Council must act quickly to stop the
carnage in the Middle East. While the draft resolution
is being vetoed, the basics of international law are
being trampled on and the bedrock of the multilateral
system is being eroded. The Secretary-General has
already written to the Council invoking Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the International
Court of Justice has issued provisional measures. The
Council must respond forcefully to the serious violations
of international law and international humanitarian law
in the Gaza conflict and uphold the authority of the
international rule of law.
The Security Council must take action to push for
a ceasefire. That should not be a matter for debate. It is
rather a moral obligation that the Council cannot shy
away from. It is a legal responsibility that the Council
must assume. Moreover, it is a political requirement
that the Council must fulfil in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The veto cannot muffle the strong call for a
ceasefire and an end to the war. The Security Council
cannot stop its efforts to uphold justice and fulfil its
responsibilities just because of the veto.
China urges Israel to heed the call of the international
community, abandon its plan for a Rafah offensive and
stop its collective punishment of the people of Palestine.
We expect countries with significant influence to base
their actions less on political calculations, to be truly
impartial and responsible and to make the right choice
in pushing for a ceasefire in Gaza.
We call on the international community to pool all
diplomatic efforts to give the people of Gaza a chance
to live, give the people of the entire Middle East region
a chance to have peace and to provide a chance for
justice to be upheld.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): We voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2024/173 because the killing of civilians in
Gaza must stop.
The suffering that Palestinians are enduring is
beyond anything a human being should be subjected
to. A possible Israeli ground offensive in Rafah would
have unimaginable humanitarian consequences. It
would push us on a path of no return. It is our duty to
react before we wake up in a nightmare. And that is
why we are convinced it is high time for the Council to
put a brake on those actions.
Let me emphasize once again that Slovenia
condemns the horrific terrorist attack by Hamas on
7 October, as well as its continuing attacks on Israel.
We continue to call for the immediate and safe release
of all hostages. We feel the pain of their relatives and
loved ones. We thank the leaders of Egypt, Qatar and
the United States for their tireless efforts, and we hope
that the negotiations they are facilitating will soon bring
peace to Gaza and return the hostages home safely.

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 7/21
However, it is the responsibility of the Council to
maintain international peace and security. We believe
that everyone can — and should — contribute their
piece of the puzzle to efforts aimed at bringing peace.
We believe in the complementarity of all
efforts — bilateral, regional and those of the Council.
The Council’s role is important, and it is indispensable
in ending hostilities, bringing hostages home, rapidly
and safely delivering humanitarian assistance and
drafting a day-after road map.
Lastly, the Council has a responsibility to the
international community. Its expectations have been
clearly expressed through General Assembly resolutions
(resolution ES/10-21 and resolution ES/10-22), with the
overwhelming support of Member States. It has been
clearly manifested by citizens across the globe. Their
voices are loud and clear. The war needs to stop. The
Security Council needs to listen to those voices of
global consciousness and respond to their demands and
pleas. And it all starts with a call for a ceasefire to end
hostilities, to bring hostages home, to bring water and
food to starving Palestinians and to silence and clear
the skies over Gaza and Israel — a call addressed to
both sides, Israel and Hamas.
It is our firm belief that Algeria proposed a
balanced text, calling for respect of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, addressing all
violations committed by both sides of the conflict and
calling for accountability for those violations. It puts
the protection of civilians, as a civilized norm, at the
centre of our action.
We therefore deeply regret that the Council was not
able to adopt the draft resolution, which we supported
strongly, but we cannot give up. It is our responsibility
to continue working towards a consensus in this body
for peace in the Middle East.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2024/173 and regrets that it was not adopted despite the
very broad support it enjoys among Council members.
I would like to thank the Algerian delegation for
its efforts in building consensus around the text, which
calls in particular for an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire in Gaza and the immediate and unconditional
release of all hostages held captive in Gaza since the
acts of terror perpetrated by Hamas on 7 October.
Almost three weeks have passed since the first
draft of the text was submitted. Switzerland welcomed
the intense negotiations taking place in the region
and stressed the need to give them the necessary
time to reach a result. At the same time, we stressed
the responsibility of the Council to act, in accordance
with its mandate, for the respect of international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians.
We regret that a firmer and more explicit
condemnation of Hamas’s acts of terror was not
included in the draft resolution, despite the appeals of
several Council members, including Switzerland.
However, the need to protect civilians in Gaza
is growing by the day. Respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights, in particular with
regard to the protection of civilians, must remain a
priority for the Council. Under the Geneva Conventions,
the delivery of humanitarian assistance must be safe,
rapid and unimpeded. We cannot allow hundreds of
thousands of besieged civilians to be left to face famine
and epidemics, without adequate security guarantees
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and for their
own protection.
Moreover, Switzerland is very concerned about
the risk of a large-scale military operation in Rafah
and the subsequent regional escalation it could entail.
The draft resolution was therefore intended as a
preventive measure against further escalation on the
ground, which would endanger the lives of all civilians,
including the hostages. That is why the call for an
immediate humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza is in line
with our collective commitment to respect and ensure
respect for the Geneva Conventions and international
humanitarian law in all circumstances.
Switzerland remains committed to unified action
by the Council in that direction. We also recall that
the parties are obliged to respect the two previous
resolutions on this subject (resolutions 2712 (2023) and
2720 (2023). And we also recall the mandatory nature
of the provisional measures ordered by the International
Court of Justice on 26 January.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
France thanks Algeria for proposing draft resolution
S/2024/173. It regrets that it could not be adopted, given
the catastrophic situation on the ground.
The immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages, explicitly called for by resolutions 2712 (2023)

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
8/21 24-04552
and 2720 (2023), as well as the draft resolution that was
just rejected, must happen without further delay.
It is urgent that an agreement on a ceasefire be
reached that will finally guarantee the protection of
all civilians and the massive and unhindered delivery
of emergency assistance. The human toll and the
humanitarian situation in Gaza are intolerable, and
Israeli operations must cease.
It is urgent that massive amounts of humanitarian
aid be delivered the people of Gaza. It is imperative to
open the Ashdod port, a direct land route from Jordan
and all crossing points.
It is unacceptable that the Council has still not
condemned the terrorist acts committed by Hamas and
other terrorist groups on 7 October, as well as the sexual
violence used as a weapon of war by those terrorists.
France deplores that and calls on the Council to quickly
put an end to that culpable ambiguity.
France reiterates its unwavering commitment to
Israel’s security and its solidarity with the Israeli people
in the wake of the terrorist attacks.
France will remain resolutely committed to the
Council’s full mobilization on all aspects of the crisis:
security, humanitarian and political.
France reiterates that only a two-State solution
can meet the security needs of Israel and the Israeli
people, as well as the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinians for a State. That involves the creation of a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I wish to begin by
expressing our gratitude to Guyanese presidency for
convening this meeting to take action on this important
draft resolution on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question (S/2024/173). We also express our
sincere appreciation to Algeria for the tireless work
that led to the submission of the draft resolution aimed
at ending the totally unacceptable and unbearable
suffering of the Palestinian people and the humanitarian
catastrophe unfolding in Gaza.
By voting in favour of this Security Council
draft resolution, Mozambique aligns itself with the
international community as a whole in its effort
overwhelmingly calling for the immediate cessation
of hostilities in the Gaza strip. We consider it
imperative that all parties scrupulously comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, in particular
with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We strongly call for total and full
compliance with the provisional measures laid down by
the order of the International Court of Justice within
the scope of articles II and III of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
handed down on 26 January 2024.
Throughout history, we have had our share of
painful experience with war and armed conflict. It is
on that basis, and on that of the dictates of the laws
of war that we embrace, that Mozambique firmly
opposes the forced displacement of the Palestinian
civilian population, women and children in particular.
In that connection, we strongly appeal for the full
implementation of resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720
(2023). In the same vein, Mozambique demands the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages
and the guarantee of humanitarian access to meet the
medical needs of all hostages.
We urge the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to continue working
together tirelessly to achieve peace and stability in the
region, based on a two-State solution for the people of
Palestine and Israel.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea voted in favour of the draft resolution proposed
by Algeria (S/2024/173), considering the urgent need
for a humanitarian ceasefire to end the suffering of
civilians in Gaza. Right now in Rafah, where more
than half of the entire population of Gaza is densely
packed, people are panicking before the looming
catastrophe that may be caused by a full-scale ground
operation. The Republic of Korea could not ignore
the possibility of another humanitarian calamity that
will lead to a huge number of fatalities. Nonetheless,
we adhere to our position that the heinous terrorist
attacks by Hamas on 7 October are the direct cause of
the current disaster in Gaza. It is therefore regrettable
that a clear and unified condemnation of the deplorable
terrorist acts perpetrated by Hamas was missing in the
draft resolution.
The Republic of Korea takes note that serious
negotiations among key stakeholders — namely, Egypt,
Qatar, the United States and Israel — are vigorously
under way on the ground to achieve the long-overdue

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 9/21
release of the hostages. We express our strong support
and appreciation for those efforts.
The Republic of Korea will continue to engage
in Council deliberations, actively and constructively,
to achieve a ceasefire in Gaza and realize the two-
State solution.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): It has been more than four
months of devastation, hostilities and suffering since
Hamas’s horrifying acts of terror against Israel. We are
witnessing an alarming escalation of violence and an
unimaginable humanitarian catastrophe. The situation
on the ground is only worsening as each day goes by.
Particularly, the situation in Rafah is deeply worrisome.
Japan appreciates the ongoing tireless diplomatic
efforts led by the United States and other countries to
secure the release of hostages, improve the humanitarian
situation and calm the situation as soon as possible.
Japan believes that a humanitarian ceasefire needs
to be realized promptly in such a way as to ensure
an environment conducive to carrying out sufficient
humanitarian assistance activities and to lead to the
release of the remaining hostages, thereby resulting
in the realization of a sustainable ceasefire. Based
on that position, we call on all the parties concerned
to act immediately as a humanitarian imperative. In
that vein, Japan voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2024/173).
We would like to express our gratitude to Algeria
for its efforts to coordinate various positions among
Council members. At the same time, in an effort
to ensure a fairer and more balanced text, the draft
resolution should have included a condemnation of
Hamas’s terrorist attacks, on which the Security
Council has so far failed to speak out.
Although we could not agree on a draft resolution
that all Council members are able to support, we are all
engaging seriously to stop the violence. The Council
should be a place to explore and find peace and security
jointly, not a place to point fingers. Japan will continue
to work constructively with other Council members to
find a path forward to achieve peace and stability in
the region.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta also thanks Algeria
for its measured and constructive approach as penholder
throughout the negotiations.
Malta voted in favour of this draft resolution
(S/2024/173), and we unequivocally reiterate our call
for a permanent ceasefire. It is therefore regrettable that
the use of the veto prevents the Council from calling for
an end to the conflict. We also believe that the Council
has provided the ongoing negotiations taking place on
the ground the necessary space and time. However,
regrettably, we still find ourselves on the precipice of
another wave of hostilities. That will undoubtedly have
catastrophic consequences on the civilian population
in Rafah, an area already designated as a safe zone.
We also reject and denounce any forced displacement
of the Palestinian civilian population from and within
Gaza. Such actions amount to grave breaches of
international law.
The severely deteriorating humanitarian conditions
and the threat of famine within Gaza are extremely
troubling and need to be addressed urgently. Israel is
required to facilitate the full, rapid, safe and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian aid into Gaza. At the same
time, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential
to ensuring an effective humanitarian response. The
broader situation in the region also continues to be
deeply worrisome. In the circumstances, the full and
immediate implementation of resolutions 2712 (2023)
and 2720 (2023) is now more pressing than ever.
We should be clear that the Council has a duty and
responsibility to ensure that its decisions are respected.
We also echo the call for the remaining hostages to be
immediately, safely and unconditionally released, and
we call on the Council to denounce the terrorist acts of
7 October 2023.
In conclusion, Malta underlines its unwavering
commitment to a comprehensive peace based on a two-
State solution.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
We want to see the fighting in Gaza end as soon as
possible, in a way that never again allows Hamas to
carry out the appalling terrorist attacks on Israel that
we saw on 7 October of last year. Palestinian civilians
are facing a devastating humanitarian crisis. We are
particularly worried about the situation in Rafah, where
a military operation could have appalling consequences
for civilians sheltering there with nowhere else to go.
Ongoing negotiations are critical to ensuring the release
of the hostages held in Gaza.
We are calling for an immediate suspension of the
fighting in order to get aid in and hostages out, leading
to a permanent, sustainable ceasefire. That means

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
10/21 24-04552
releasing all the hostages; forming a new Palestinian
Government for the West Bank and Gaza, accompanied
by an international support package; removing Hamas’s
capacity to launch attacks against Israel; ensuring that
Hamas is no longer in charge of Gaza; and establishing
a political horizon that provides a credible and
irreversible pathway towards a two-State solution.
We welcome the efforts of our Algerian colleagues
on draft resolution S/2024/173, and we regret that some
of our proposals were not taken on board. Simply calling
for a ceasefire, as the draft resolution does, will not
make it happen. Indeed, because it could endanger the
hostage negotiations, it could actually make a ceasefire
less likely. The way to stop the fighting and potentially
stop it from restarting is to begin with a pause to get
hostages out and aid in. That is what we are calling for.
It could end the fighting now. We will continue to work
for a stop to the fighting, a humanitarian response at
scale, the release of all hostages and the delivery of the
two sovereign States of Israel and Palestine, which will
ensure peace, security and justice for both countries.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone would like to thank Algeria for proposing
and facilitating efforts to agree to a draft resolution
(S/2024/173) that among other things would have led
to an immediate ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. We also
thank the Algerian delegation for leading a reasonable,
transparent and inclusive process. Sierra Leone
voted in favour of the draft resolution because of the
imperative for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire.
The Security Council is mandated to act promptly and
effectively in order to maintain international peace and
security. The Council has had its attention called to the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, and the Secretary-
General has called on it to act under Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Some members of the Security Council, including
representatives of the delegation of Sierra Leone, have
had an opportunity to visit the Rafah crossing both from
the Egyptian border and from Israel. Their assessment
has been that only a humanitarian ceasefire will put
an end to the intolerable killings in Gaza and to the
looming and unthinkable catastrophe in Rafah. Sierra
Leone appreciates and commends the member States
that have embarked on diplomatic engagement with
parties to the conflict to secure a prolonged pause in
the hostilities. But while that is being done, we remain
worried that reaching a meaningful conclusion in
political terms takes time — a luxury that the suffering
Palestinian people, the families of the hostages and the
hostages themselves cannot afford.
The other main organs of the United Nations have
acted in a timely and effective manner in this tragic
conflict. The General Assembly has adopted resolutions
ES-10/21 and ES-10/22, with an overwhelming majority
demanding, in the latter, an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire in Gaza. The Secretary-General invoked
Article 99 of the Charter, last used more than half
a century ago, to warn us in the Council of the
humanitarian catastrophe that we are now seeing in
Gaza. As Council members, we were urged to demand
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire. The International
Court of Justice has acted promptly and rightly when
called on to do so by South Africa. Following the
requests for an indication of provisional measures, the
Court, in its 26 January order, specifically ordered,
among other things, that
“the State of Israel shall take immediate and
effective measures to enable the provision of
urgently needed basic services and humanitarian
assistance to address the adverse conditions of
life faced by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip”
(Application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the
Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel), para.86).
The Court deemed it necessary to emphasize that
all parties to the conflict in the Gaza Strip are bound by
international humanitarian law. It expressed its grave
concern about the fate of the hostages abducted during
the attack in Israel on 7 October 2023 and held since
then by Hamas and other armed groups, and called
for their immediate and unconditional release. The
Court further reminded the parties that the provisional
measures ordered under article 41 of its Statute have
binding effect and therefore create international legal
obligations for any party to whom the provisional
measures are addressed.
Sierra Leone is of the view that in the absence
of any prima facie change in the current perilous
humanitarian conditions prevailing in Gaza, coupled
with the continuing hostage situation despite the
26 January order of the International Court of Justice,
the Security Council is now more than ever compelled
to act to use the myriad of tools available to it to save
human lives and put a check on the mounting death toll
and inordinate destruction of civilian objects.

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 11/21
It is extremely worrisome that more than 130
days into the conflict, a draft resolution calling for
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, demanding the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages,
rejecting the forced displacement of Palestinians,
reiterating the call for full, rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access in Gaza and the optimal political
solution of a two-State solution could not be adopted,
which we deeply regret. At this stage, considering
the immense suffering, death and anguish in Gaza,
the Security Council must not relent until a complete
halt to the continued hostilities in the Gaza Strip
and in the West Bank is achieved. To do otherwise
is to accept passively the prevailing criticisms of the
dysfunctionality of the Council. Meanwhile, the reality
in Gaza is that of famine-like conditions, malnutrition,
displacement, the spread of infectious diseases and
the potential for spillover of the conflict to the wider
region. Our failure to act extinguishes hope — the hope
that 1.3 million Palestinians in Rafah have supplicated
to us — and beyond that the hope that humankind has
placed in us as members to deliver on the Council’s
mandate. This must awaken our resolve to act.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone sincerely looks
forward to not only having a positive outcome from
the ongoing diplomatic negotiation being mediated
by the United States, Egypt and Qatar, but also to a
Security Council product that would call for a full and
unconditional humanitarian ceasefire and the release of
all the hostages. That, we hope, will lead to an end in
the fighting and alleviate the humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Algeria for the draft resolution (S/2024/173)
that was put forward. Ecuador voted in favour of it
because we believe that the Security Council must take
a stand on the humanitarian situation, which continues
to deteriorate, with thousands of innocent victims. The
draft resolution on which we voted was not perfect,
and not all of the issues we believe to be appropriate
were included in it, but it was presented following
a negotiations process and included the necessary
elements about a situation that is deteriorating by
the minute.
Mainly, the text on which we just voted requested
a humanitarian ceasefire that would make it possible
to alleviate the situation for civilians. It also demanded
the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages
and deplored violence against civilians and all acts
of terrorism, including, implicitly, the horrific acts
committed by Hamas in October last year. However, it
should be mentioned that Ecuador, like several members
of the Council, urgently requested that the text include
explicit condemnation of the terrorist acts perpetrated
by Hamas. We regret that that condemnation was not
included in the text. We believe that it is important to
clearly indicate responsibility, which is apparent now,
in order to later attribute responsibility, which will be
disclosed in the future.
Ecuador deplores the fact that, at this time, a draft
resolution could not be adopted. We will continue
working so that the Council can take a stance and take
effective action via a successful adoption.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we bear witness to another dark
chapter in the history of the Security Council. It was
again written by the delegation of the United States,
which continues to pursue the same goal — to cover for
its closest Middle East ally and stall for time as much
as possible so that it can complete its inhumane plans
for Gaza, specifically to force Palestinians out of the
Gaza Strip and completely cleanse the enclave, literally
turning it into an uninhabited territory.
Under those circumstances, Israeli political circles
do not hesitate to think in terms that completely rule
out the two-State solution. By having once again
counterposed calls to end the carnage in Gaza and
bring about a ceasefire to the demand to condemn the
actions of Hamas, our United States colleagues have
hypocritically remained silent about the fact that,
on 18 October 2023, they vetoed the Brazilian draft
resolution (S/2023/773) containing such condemnation.
The draft resolution (S/2024/173) put forward by
Algeria had the potential to turn the tide and stop the
destruction of Palestinians in Gaza. Regrettably, the
fourth veto cast by the United States prevented that
from happening and doomed thousands of peaceful
citizens in Gaza to death. However, everyone should
understand that the result is not a failure of the Security
Council, which was actually united today, but of the
destructive policy of a single member — the United
States. Full responsibility for the consequences falls
on Washington, regardless of its attempts to shirk
its responsibility by talking about its “important
mediation efforts”.
Regardless of how bitter the aftertaste of today’s
vote, we have no intention of giving up. The Security

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
12/21 24-04552
Council’s demand for an immediate ceasefire remains
imperative. Without it, any product of the Council would
be devoid of practical meaning. Members have all had
the opportunity to see that, based on the example of
toothless humanitarian resolutions on Gaza previously
adopted Council. They all remained on paper because,
as we warned, in conditions of active hostilities, it is
impossible to deliver humanitarian aid or monitor
humanitarian pauses.
Turning to the text put forward by the United
States, which was so proactively championed by the
representative of the United States today, as far as we
know, that text has not even been officially circulated
at the Security Council, not to mention the fact that
there was no comprehensive discussion thereof. For
that reason, for now, it appears to be further spoilers,
which are designed to detract attention from the most
recent shameful veto cast by the United States. It was
a veto on a critically significant draft resolution for a
ceasefire in Gaza.
We call on the members the Security Council not
to be misled by ludicrous and duplicitous admonitions
about the need to wait just a bit longer. The Security
Council and the world have waited for five months. And
each passing hour we wait brings with it an increasing
number of human victims. The United States draft text
does not include — I emphasize, does not include — any
calls for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza. The text
refers only to a temporary ceasefire, and only when
conditions are right. Therefore, this brainchild of the
United States is no viable alternative, and cannot be
a viable alternative, to the Algerian draft resolution,
which the United States vetoed. It is yet another bad-
faith attempt by Washington to stall for time for the
purposes of advancing Israel’s interests and allowing
it to resolve the Palestinian question once and for all.
Our shared objective is to prevent that from taking
place and to achieve just peace between Palestine and
Israel, on the basis of Security Council resolutions and
General Assembly resolutions. Let us resolve the issue
together. And perhaps our United States colleagues will
at some point have their conscience awakened.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to all
members of the Security Council for constructively
participating in the negotiation process. I also thank
all States that voted for the adoption of draft resolution
S/2024/173, which primarily calls for a ceasefire in
Gaza, and I even thank those States that did not object
to its adoption.
The draft resolution would have sent a strong
message to the Palestinians. It would have told them
that the world will not be silent about their ordeal.
Unfortunately, however, the Security Council once
again failed to rise to people’s calls and aspirations. But
that failure does not absolve the Council of the duty
to shoulder its responsibilities. It does not absolve the
international community of its obligations vis-à-vis
the unarmed Palestinian people. It does not absolve the
occupation authorities of their obligation to implement
the precautionary measures of the International Court
of Justice.
It is high time to put an end to the aggression and
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Gaza. It is clear that resolutions 2712
(2023) and 2720 (2023) have not achieved their desired
objectives and that the assistance has not met the basic
needs of the Palestinian people. We have to acknowledge
that only a ceasefire can achieve the desired objective.
The current situation requires everyone, as President
Tebboune of Algeria has stressed, to uphold the
purposes and principles of the United Nations, provide
the necessary protection to the Palestinian people and
put an end to the historic injustice they have been facing.
The peoples of our region have always considered
the Security Council to be the main source of
international legitimacy. But it has unfortunately failed
them once again. Our message to the Council today
is that the international community must respond
to the calls for ending the killing of Palestinians
by demanding an immediate ceasefire. All who are
hindering that objective should review their policies and
their calculations, because wrong decisions taken today
will have a cost for our region and our world tomorrow.
That cost will be violence and instability. The members
of the Council should examine their consciences and
ask themselves what the results of their decisions will
be and how history will judge them.
Before I conclude, I want to tell everyone that we
will bury our martyrs this evening in Rafah, in Gaza and
in all Palestine, and that Algeria will return tomorrow
on behalf of the Arab nation, the Muslim nation and
the free peoples of the world, accompanied by the souls
of the thousands of innocent people who have been
killed by the Israeli occupation with no accountability
whatsoever. Algeria will return to knock on the doors

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 13/21
of the Security Council once again and to call for an
end to the bloodshed in Palestine. We will not stop
until the Council fully assumes its responsibilities and
imposes an immediate ceasefire. We will never tire,
and our determination will never waver.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Guyana.
Guyana is disappointed that the Council has once
again been unable to deliver a ceasefire for the people of
Gaza. A ceasefire would be the difference between life
and death for the hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
and others trapped in the war zone that Gaza has
become. The delegation of Algeria approached the
submission of draft resolution S/2024/173 with great
patience, transparency and inclusivity. It has listened
to all sides, acquiescing to requests for additional time
to be given to other efforts under way. It has been
almost three weeks since the draft was first circulated,
and we still find ourselves at square one. In that time,
almost 2,000 more Palestinians have been killed in
Gaza and another 2,000 injured. In those three weeks,
every aspect of life in Gaza has gotten worse. Internal
displacement has increased, with a serious crisis on the
way in Rafah. The food insecurity there has continued
to worsen, with the latest Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification (IPC) report stating that Gaza now
has the highest share of people facing devastating levels
of acute food insecurity that the IPC has ever classified
for any given area or country.
The humanitarian situation has been described as
increasingly severe. Humanitarian access is extremely
limited, and people’s desperation has led them to loot aid
trucks to secure a morsel of food. The population is in
dire straits. The most vulnerable among them, including
children, the elderly and people with underlying
conditions, are especially vulnerable to malnutrition.
All of that is happening in freezing temperatures.
In that time, we have also seen a further hardening
of positions for the worse. For example, we have heard
the determination of the Israeli Government to proceed
with a ground operation in Rafah, despite the strong
urging to the contrary by many of its friends and
partners and others in the international community. We
know what a ground operation in Rafah would mean
for the people who were driven there by the Israel
Defense Forces. The orders of the International Court
of Justice of 26 January are being completely ignored,
as though there is no obligation to adhere to them.
United Nations personnel are continuing to operate in
Gaza under extremely dangerous circumstances, with
unprecedented numbers of them killed since 7 October.
Deconfliction mechanisms are not being respected;
therefore everyone is at risk and nowhere is safe.
What else needs to happen to act for the people in
Gaza? How many more lives must be lost? How many
more must be maimed? How many more? We need a
ceasefire now. Resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023)
cannot be fully implemented if there is no ceasefire.
The longer we take to agree on the need for a ceasefire,
the longer the Council will be seen as being complicit
in what is taking place in Gaza.
To be clear, Guyana also calls for the release of
all hostages taken on 7 October and of Palestinians
unlawfully detained in Israeli prisons without trial.
Although progress has been stalled for decades, the two-
State solution remains the best option for a permanent
and lasting resolution of the Palestinian question. The
current situation in Gaza puts the two-State solution
at great risk, especially given the rhetoric from some
Israeli Government officials.
Guyana calls on the Council to act now for Gaza
and for the future of both Palestine and Israel. A
peaceful and stable Israel depends on a peaceful and
stable Palestine. The two are not mutually exclusive,
and peace in Palestine and Israel is crucial for lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East region.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank you, Madam
President, and your friendly country of Guyana for
your leadership of the Security Council.
We also thank Algeria for all its efforts and for the
statement delivered a few minutes ago by my brother
Ambassador Bendjama, bringing forth a draft resolution
on behalf of the Group of Arab States (S/2024/173),
which was just voted upon, regarding the grave situation
that continues to be faced by the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip as Israel, the occupying Power, carries
on with its genocidal war.
We also thank the 13 members of the Security
Council that voted in favour of the draft resolution.
We also thank them for their intense engagement with
the Arab Group, led by our brother the Ambassador

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
14/21 24-04552
of Algeria, over the course of the past three weeks,
negotiating in good faith to try to save the lives of
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and not allow the
looming catastrophe to fly over our heads and lead to
further devastation in the Gaza Strip. We sincerely
thank them for that effort, for their principled position
and for their determination for a ceasefire to be
demanded and implemented now to save lives, to save
the Gaza Strip and to save the 1.5 million Palestinians
in the Rafah district.
The draft resolution was brought to the Council
precisely because Israel persists with its onslaught and
with every single grave breach it has been committing,
despite the near-unanimous calls by the international
community for a ceasefire and despite the provisional
measures of the International Court of Justice ordering
Israel to cease all acts of genocide and incitement to
genocide and to ensure humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, who every day are facing death and
destruction and the torment of starvation and repeated
forced displacement.
It has been nearly three weeks since I last
addressed the Council following the Court’s order (see
S/PV.9540), appealing for action to be taken to ensure
the implementation of the provisional measures, to
ensure a ceasefire that would protect the Palestinian
people and to avert the further ravaging of their lives by
the Israeli onslaught. But our appeals have regrettably
been to no avail. Between our previous Council
meeting on 31 January and today, the casualty toll has
risen from 26,000 Palestinians killed by the Israeli
occupying forces to now almost 30,000 people, and
more than 69,000 people injured. That means in just
the past 20 days alone, Israel has killed nearly 4,000
more Palestinian children, women and men. That is in
just 20 days.
That is the deplorable consequence of inaction. It
means more than 200 Palestinians killed every day. It
means that, by the time this Security Council meeting
ends, more than 25 Palestinians will have been killed.
It means that more babies will be murdered, wounded,
amputated and orphaned and that more children will
die of hunger, hypothermia and disease. It means the
continued threat of the further forced displacement of
families, the looming danger of a mass expulsion or,
worse, the slaughter of the nearly 1.5 million people
in Rafah, who have nowhere to flee and no protection
whatsoever. It means the continued deprivation of the
entire population of Gaza, left without the food, water,
medicine and shelter essential to alleviate suffering and
ensure survival. It means that human lives that could
have been spared and saved are instead being forsaken
to Israel’s genocidal war machine, deliberately and
knowingly by those who oppose a ceasefire.
We all know that. We know the staggering figures.
We have heard the warnings from the Secretary-
General, the heads of all United Nations agencies on
the ground, dozens of independent special rapporteurs
and humanitarian and human rights agencies the world
over. We have seen it with our own eyes in pictures
and videos that have seared and stained our collective
conscience and broken our hearts and our humanity.
In the face of Israel’s brazen violation of the
order of the International Court of Justice, the Court
sent another warning by issuing another decision on
16 February, reminding Israel that it is bound to fully
comply with its obligations under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and all provisional measures ordered by the Court on
26 January. The Court also had to remind Israel that its
obligations should be effective immediately.
The call for a ceasefire should have been agreed
to long ago. What threshold has to be crossed for the
Council to finally demand a ceasefire? What could be
more serious than the crime of genocide? As my brother
Amar said, history will judge the Council harshly. It
is already doing so, as the Council’s credibility and
authority are being impaired in the eyes of people all
over the world, perhaps irreparably. But we will not
be complicit with this inaction. We have a duty to our
people to seek every possible pathway to bring an end
to the slaughter, trauma and terror and to the threats
to expel them from their land. We will not be silent,
and we will take every legitimate means of action to
uphold our sacred obligations, defend and protect our
people and pursue justice for them. That is why we have
returned to the Security Council over and over again,
imploring it to act to protect our people. That is why
we will not relent in seeking accountability, calling on
the Council, the General Assembly and all States to act
in line with the Charter of the United Nations and all
obligations under international law, without selectivity
and without exception. We will not stop demanding
accountability for the war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide that Israel is perpetrating
against the Palestinian people. But accountability must
move beyond words in this Chamber. It must mean

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 15/21
that there will be real consequences for the occupying
Power’s criminal behaviour.
In that regard, I just returned around midnight last
night from The Hague, where representatives of the
State of Palestine stood before the International Court
of Justice, appealing to the Court for Justice after the
more than 75 years of Nakba, 56 years of belligerent
occupation, 17 years of blockades and nearly 140
days of a vindictive, punitive siege and massacres
perpetrated by Israel in Gaza. That is a genocide.
What crimes has Israel not yet committed? Together
with an unprecedented number of countries, we have
gone to the Court to confront Israel’s impunity, which
has made life a living hell for the Palestinian people,
appealing for an immediate and complete end to the
illegal colonial occupation and apartheid regime — the
root cause of all the ills that our people are suffering,
including this genocidal war. The Court has fulfilled
its solemn duty, acting swiftly both in its response
to the case brought before it by South Africa against
Israel under the Genocide Convention and in response
to the General Assembly’s request for an advisory
opinion, which we hope will be a true turning point
in the quest for accountability and for justice for the
Palestinian people.
When will the Security Council finally fulfil its
solemn duty? When will the Council act to demand the
ceasefire that a majority of the rest of the international
community has been demanding for months? The veto
of the draft resolution is not only regrettable after weeks
of consultations with every single Council member and
the enduring patience of the State of Palestine, the Arab
States and virtually the entire international community,
which for months have demanded a ceasefire, but it
is absolutely reckless and dangerous, again shielding
Israel even as it commits the most shocking crimes
while exposing millions of innocent Palestinian
civilians to its wrath and further untold horrors. It is
not Israel that should be protected by the use of the
veto. It is Palestinian children, women and men who
must be protected by the Council’s actions now. Only
with a ceasefire can we give life a chance, along with
the implementation of resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720
(2023), as you correctly indicated, Madam President.
A ceasefire would allow these two resolutions to be
implemented so that humanitarian assistance can
reach the millions of desperate people in need, so
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other agencies
can deliver life-saving aid and our collective efforts
can chart a path of justice and peace. As long as the
Council fails to demand a ceasefire, it will not only be
considered derelict in its duties but also an enabler of
the horrific crimes that we are currently witnessing in
the Gaza Strip.
The message that this veto sends Israel today is
that it can continue to get away with murder. Israel
cannot, should not and will not get away with it. We
will not allow it. The veto does not absolve Israel or
those who shield it of their obligations, not here in the
Security Council and not in the International Court of
Justice or anywhere else. Even if the Security Council
continues to shirk its responsibilities and be obstructed
by a permanent member’s use of the veto over and over
again, the other entities of the international system are
upholding their responsibilities, and one day, Palestinian
children will not be viewed as a demographic threat but
as children with a right to life and to the fulfilment of
their hopes and dreams.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Since 7 October the Security
Council has voted on numerous draft resolutions
constructed around the same flawed theme — the
concept of a ceasefire. The word is constantly mentioned
in the Security Council and the General Assembly and
by United Nations officials and agencies as if it were a
silver bullet or a magical solution to all of the region’s
problems. For the past 137 days, the only solution that
has been discussed on the international stage is this
absurd notion of a ceasefire. Will a ceasefire bring
the hostages home? Will a ceasefire eliminate Hamas?
Will a ceasefire disarm Hizbullah, the Houthis and all
the other Iranian terrorist proxies in our region? Will
a ceasefire end the genocidal ambitions of Palestinian
terror groups aiming for Israel’s annihilation? We
are still waiting for President Abbas to condemn the
7 October massacre. What exactly will that silver bullet
of a ceasefire achieve? A ceasefire would achieve one
thing and one thing only — the survival of Hamas. The
exact opposite of how it is portrayed, a ceasefire would
be a death sentence for many more Israelis and Gazans.
Supporting a ceasefire means supporting the survival of
jihadist terrorists who will continue butchering Israelis
and endlessly spilling the blood of innocent civilians.
There is a reason that the International Court of
Justice unanimously and rightly rejected South Africa’s

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
16/21 24-04552
attempt to undermine Israel’s right to defend itself by
calling for a ceasefire. The very idea that Israel would be
denied that fundamental right, while Hamas would be
free to continue its terror and hold hostages, is morally
unthinkable, because as everyone knows, Hamas will
not even read the Council’s draft resolutions. Why
are some Council members therefore so determined
to impose harmful measures — measures that the
International Court of Justice refused to take? They all
know the answers.
A ceasefire is the epitome of a kick-the-can-down-
the-road policy. A ceasefire today means immunity for
baby-killers and rapists. It is an easy way to make this
problem an issue for another day. With a ceasefire in
place, Hamas would regroup and rearm, and their next
attempted genocide against Israelis would only be a
question of when — not if. Hamas has sworn publicly
to commit the atrocities of 7 October again and again
until Israel is annihilated. So then why is the Council,
which is charged with ensuring security, so fixated on
aiding those monsters to stay in power?
Just yesterday, Israel exposed footage proving that
Shiri Bibas and her two children, 4-year-old Ariel and
1-year-old Kfir, were taken to Gaza alive. A 4-year-
old and a baby, among others, were taken hostage by
Hamas, yet most Council members choose to support a
ceasefire — why do they want to leave them in Gaza?
Do they not see how immoral that is and what kind of
precedent it would set for terrorists around the globe?
Did they think about babies’ fear when they voted on
draft resolution S/2024/173 — a draft resolution that
would ensure that Kfir, along with 133 other hostages,
remain in dark terror tunnels?
Did Council members think about Noa Argamani?
Noa’s look of sheer horror as she was violently separated
from her boyfriend, Avinatan Or, and taken to Gaza on
the back of a motorbike has become a symbol of the
hostages’ plight. In the heart-wrenching video, one can
hear Noa screaming and pleading with the terrorists not
to abduct her. Noa’s mother, Liora, born Li Chonghong,
a Chinese-Israeli citizen originally from Wuhan, is
terminally ill with stage-4 brain cancer. All she asks is
that she can hug Noa, her only daughter, one last time
before she succumbs to her illness. I therefore urge my
Chinese colleague, in the name of Liora, Li Chonghong,
rather than pushing for a harmful ceasefire, which will
keep Noa in Gaza, to pressure Hamas to release Noa
so that her mother can see Noa one last time before
her death.
Jihadists around the globe see that the body
mandated to uphold international security is willing to
allow Hamas murderers and rapists to continue their
reign of terror. Council members’ calls for a ceasefire
empower Hamas, giving them hope to stay in power.
That does not ensure security, but prevents it. They
may truly want a ceasefire — but Israel, too, wants a
ceasefire. Our children — not theirs — are the ones
falling in battle against bloodthirsty terrorists. If
Hamas survives, it will be our children that Hamas will
murder in cold blood again. Israel seeks a ceasefire, but
there is only one formula that we are willing to accept:
all our hostages must be released, and Hamas must turn
themselves in.
The Algerian draft resolution not only empowers
jihadists by calling for a ceasefire, but it also again
fails to condemn Hamas for their heinous crimes. Not
condemning Hamas’s atrocities has now become a
tradition here. It is tragic. Hamas Nazis invaded Israel,
deliberately murdering families, raping women and girls
and destroying everything they could get their hands
on. They are brutal terrorists who took pride in their
barbarism, yet not even once since 7 October has the
Council or any United Nations body condemned Hamas
for their violence. One day — some have mentioned
history here — when historians study the reasons that
the United Nations lost its standing and influence, the
inability of the Organization to condemn terrorists who
slaughter children will be one of the driving factors.
Mark my words.
But the effects of the Security Council’s decisions
spread much further beyond this Chamber. If the
Council is incapable of condemning Hamas, United
Nations officials feel as if they have further legitimacy
to whitewash Hamas. Mere days ago, Under-Secretary-
General Griffiths stated that Hamas is not a terrorist
group but a political movement. Is the intentional,
brutal murder of hundreds of civilians not terror? Is the
systematic rape of women not terror? Is beheading and
burning children alive not terror?
We all know that Hamas is a terrorist organization.
Yet by staying silent in the face of Hamas’s crimes and
not condemning them, Council members allow such lies
to be perpetuated. Their politicized decision of silence
promotes the falsehoods that Hamas can be reasoned
with and that they are not the bloodthirsty terrorists
that they are. And that is the stance that the United
Nations adopts and promotes. But as a Council, they
must condemn Hamas and their atrocities in order to

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 17/21
rid this institution of its shame. They must do it for the
sake of those butchered, for the sake of the hostages and
for the sake of morality and truth. It is in their hands.
Some of my colleagues here have approached me
and asked me why Israel is so critical of the United
Nations and its agencies. The recent events over the
past weeks have hopefully made it clearer to them.
One week ago, Special Rapporteur Francesca Albanese
libellously stated that the victims of 7 October were not
murdered for their identity, but in response to Israel’s
so-called oppression. That is victim-blaming and a
clear justification of terror.
But for some United Nations employees, even
poisonous words are not enough. Dozens of employees
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) took
active roles in the 7 October massacre, while many
more praised the savage attack. Faisal Ali Mussalem
Al-Naami, an UNRWA social worker, stuffed the
body of Jonathan Samerano into a truck to be taken
to Gaza. A Hamas data centre was located directly
underneath UNRWA headquarters in Gaza, connected
to UNRWA’s power supply, and terror tunnels have
been found running underneath various UNRWA
facilities and schools — everywhere. Of UNRWA’s
1,300 employees in Gaza, 12 per cent are members
of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and at least
236 of them are active terrorists in the armed wings of
those organizations.
UNRWA has been proven to be an instrumental
part of Hamas’s terror machine, which makes UNRWA
itself a terrorist organization. Yet rather than take
responsibility for the weaponization of that murderous
United Nations Agency, Commissioner-General
Lazzarini has chosen to say that he had no knowledge
of Hamas’s hold on his own Agency. That is blatantly
false. Israel exposed terror tunnels under UNRWA
schools and supplied evidence of Hamas’s exploitation
of the Agency — you can see that on my Twitter account.
I personally sent letters to the UNRWA Commissioner-
General and the Secretary-General. We have implored
them for years to carry out a comprehensive search of
all UNRWA facilities in Gaza. Yet not only did they
refuse, but they chose to bury their heads in the sand and
ignore the reality. That is why every report, statement
or a number provided by the United Nations cannot be
trusted. In Gaza, Hamas is the United Nations and the
United Nations is Hamas.
This ostrich tactic of burying one’s head in the
sand is the modus operandi among the United Nations
leadership. Yet no matter how deep one’s head is
buried, it will not change the reality on the ground. A
terrorist is a terrorist. A terror organization is a terror
organization. And a law-abiding liberal democracy
will remain as such, even if here at the United Nations,
for political reasons, light becomes darkness and day
becomes night.
That is also the case with the escalating situation on
Israel’s northern border with Lebanon. For years — and
Council members heard it in this Chamber — Israel has
called for the Council to impose the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006). Yet for years, the United
Nations has opted for the ostrich tactic. Tragically, that
is no longer a situation that can be ignored. The clock
is ticking. It is not a matter of years, but weeks, before
Israel will be forced to implement resolution 1701
(2006) itself.
Just yesterday, a Hizbullah drone was downed
while flying over the Sea of Galilee, deep inside Israel.
More than 2,000 Hizbullah missiles and rockets have
rained down on the cities of Israel’s north. And nearly
100,000 residents of northern Israel have been displaced
owing to the threat posed by Hizbullah with, of course,
Iran’s backing.
A ceasefire in Gaza is not only destructive for
Israel and the Palestinians, but it also ensures that
a blind eye is turned to what is unfolding in the rest
of the region — be it the Houthis’s relentless attacks
on maritime trade, pro-Iran militias targeting even
American service members or Hizbullah’s constant
bombardment of Israel’s north. The clock is ticking.
And sadly, we will be forced to take decisive action.
Terror will never be tolerated.
The Council must put politics aside for the sake of
its mandate. A ceasefire that allows Hamas to remain in
power means ensured death and destruction. Ignoring
Hamas’s atrocities and not condemning them means
empowering terrorists worldwide. And focusing only
on Gaza while looking away from the terror aggression
across the region will lead to a future than none of us
seek. The Security Council must fulfil its mandate. It
must side with Israel against the forces of evil. And it
must face reality. Reality is not found when one’s head
is buried in the sand.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
18/21 24-04552
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and your friendly
country on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. It is my honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Arab countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC), namely, my country, the
State of Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the State
of Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, the Sultanate of
Oman and the Kingdom of Bahrain. We align ourselves
with the statement to be delivered shortly on behalf of
the Group of Arab States.
Today’s meeting is being held under extremely
difficult circumstances. The situation in the Gaza Strip
has been the worst humanitarian disaster the world has
seen. According to United Nations reports, there is no
safe place in the Gaza Strip. Almost all residents of the
Gaza Strip, numbering more than 2 million people, are
now refugees and facing starvation. As the aggression
by the Israeli occupation has been ongoing for nearly
five months against our Palestinian brethren, the GCC
States have strongly cautioned against the increased
frequency of military attacks against the Strip and the
increase in the number of victims — reaching nearly
100,000 people, the majority of whom are women and
children — who have been killed, wounded or are
under rubble.
In that context, we note statements by United
Nations officials who emphasized that they have never
seen a situation such as that in Gaza, which led the
Secretary-General address the Council pursuant to
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations. He has
warned against the dangers resulting from the collapse
of the humanitarian system and of public order in Gaza.
He also called for an urgent humanitarian ceasefire.
In that regard, we stress the need to fully implement
resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023).
The GCC States condemn in the strongest terms
the Israeli threats about launching a military operation
against the city of Rafah, in southern Gaza Strip. We
caution that those threats portend an increase in the
level of violence and destabilization in the region.
We also strongly condemn the attempts at forced
displacement of civilians, and we firmly reject any
military operation in the city of Rafah. We caution
against a new humanitarian disaster there, as it has
become the last refuge for hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons in the Gaza Strip.
In that context, the GCC States profoundly regret
the suspension by some donor countries of financing
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
specifically in the light of the dangerous humanitarian
situation in Gaza, where 5 million Palestinian people
depend on the Agency, in particular in the Strip. In that
regard, we align ourselves with the Secretary-General
in his call for countries that have halted their support
to UNRWA to reconsider their decision and reinstate
their financing for the Agency so as to avoid a deeper
humanitarian disaster in Gaza. Our States reiterate
their steadfast position in support of the just Palestinian
question and the legitimate rights of the fraternal
Palestinian people to establish their independent
State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The GCC States express their appreciation regarding
the ongoing negotiations on a framework agreement
for a new humanitarian truce in the Gaza Strip being
facilitated by my country, the State of Qatar, the Arab
Republic of Egypt and the United States. The aim is
to free hostages and detainees, to guarantee greater
deliveries of humanitarian and relief assistance to the
Gaza Strip and to protect civilians.
The GCC States have profound regret regarding the
failure of the Council today to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2024/173) submitted by Algeria and supported by
the Arab Group as well as by the majority of Council
members. That draft resolution is a humanitarian one
and in line with international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we wish to note that our States will continue our
efforts, alongside partners at all levels, to guarantee the
achievement of an immediate humanitarian ceasefire
in the Gaza Strip in order to stop the bloodletting of
our Palestinian brethren in the Strip, guarantee the
delivery of more humanitarian and relief assistance and
to protect civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, and your country, Guyana, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to thank you convening this
meeting. We thank Algeria, the Arab member of the

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 19/21
Council, for taking the initiative to submit the draft
resolution (S/2024/173) and for its efforts throughout
the negotiations to preserve the unity of the Security
Council and reach consensus on the call for an
immediate humanitarian ceasefire.
The ceasefire is the most urgent measure given the
catastrophic situation in the Gaza Strip and the terrible
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people,
as a result of the occupation authorities’ continued
aggression, war crimes and genocide committed against
the Palestinian people, which continue unabated.
Moreover, the occupation authorities continue to
impose collective punishment and prevent the delivery
of humanitarian and medical assistance, food, water,
fuel and all life-saving means to Gaza.
The Arab Group thanks the Council Member
States that positively contributed and constructively
participated in the negotiations on the draft resolution
and voted in favour of its adoption. At the same time, we
regret that the Council failed to adopt the draft resolution
and to shoulder its legal and moral responsibility as
the main organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reaffirm, as have
many countries around the world, members of the
Security Council, and humanitarian and international
organizations — the need for an immediate ceasefire
and to prevent the occupation authorities from carrying
out their plan, which targets more than 1.5 million
Palestinians in Rafah, so as to prevent yet another
forced displacement of Palestinians and the emptying
of Palestinian land from its population.
The Arab Group considers that it is unacceptable
by any standard for the Security Council to continue to
work on the basis of political calculations and narrow
interests, while daily attacks on the Palestinian people
continue, deepening their suffering, and thousands
are killed, including children, women, the elderly and
sick people.
The Security Council failed today to speak with
one voice and to put the principles of international law,
international humanitarian law and the right to life
first. That sends the wrong message once again to the
occupying Power and gives it carte blanche to continue
its crimes, while disregarding international legitimacy
and considering itself above the law and beyond
accountability.] It also deepens the crisis of trust in the
credibility of this important United Nations organ.
In that context, the Arab Group reiterates its
rejection of the policies that are aligned with the plans
of the occupation authorities and the effort to safeguard
those at the expense of thousands of Palestinians,
who are dying and whose land is stolen by means of
displacement and settlement schemes.
The Arab Group reaffirms its rejection for the
double standards that have contributed to the protracted
Palestinian question and prevented the implementation
of any of the relevant resolutions, with the attendant
massacres, abuse against the Palestinian people and
violations of their rights. The Group demands that the
same standards and level of commitment be applied
to the handling of all issues and situations. The Arab
Group also calls upon the international community
and the Security Council to ensure the protection
of Palestinians and to accelerate the unhindered
entry and delivery of humanitarian aid into the Gaza
Strip, in accordance with resolutions 2712 (2023) and
2720 (2023). It also reiterates its full support for the
efforts of the United Nations Senior Humanitarian
and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza, Ms. Sigrid
Kaag, and her efforts to respond to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
The ongoing efforts to reach a framework
agreement for the exchange of prisoners and detainees
and to establish a truce are not contrary to the demand
for an immediate ceasefire, which can only help to
facilitate such endeavours. There is no explanation for
the insistence on refusing to adopt the draft resolution
on that demand and to enable the international
community and the Security Council to speak with
one voice — except for the occupation Government’s
efforts to continue its military operations and to carry
out its plot to displace the Palestinians from their land.
In that regard — and faced with that approach, which
aims to neutralize the Security Council and prevent
it from shouldering its responsibility pursuant to the
Charter in such catastrophic situations — we wonder
what the Council’s role is, when it will be allowed to
play that supposed role and how many innocent lives
must be lost before that can happen. Is it not enough
to kill more than 28,000 people, injure approximately
70,000 and displace more than 1.3 million, destroy all
infrastructure, housing, hospitals, schools, places of
worship and United Nations offices, and kill dozens of
United Nations and humanitarian staff and journalists?

S/PV.9552 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 20/02/2024
20/21 24-04552
The Arab Group also condemns in the strongest
terms the occupying Power’s repeated acts of aggression
against the territories of Syria and Lebanon, its violation
of their sovereignty and its killing of innocent civilians,
acts that undermine security, peace and stability in the
region and the world The Arab Group will continue to
take action at all levels and in all forums to ensure that
the international community shoulders its responsibility,
free of selectivity and political calculations, to compel
the occupation authorities to comply with international
law and international humanitarian law and to put an
end to their schemes and grave violations against the
Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): This
morning, we have once again witnessed a blatant
example of double standards, as the United States
delegation obstructed — for the third time — the
attempt to adopt a Security Council draft resolution to
establish a ceasefire in Gaza. That was in spite of the
fact that 13 members of the Security Council voted in
favour of the Algerian draft resolution (S/2024/173),
which was submitted with the full support of the Arab
and Islamic groups at the United Nations.
As grateful as we are to Algeria, the Arab member
of the Security Council, for introducing the draft
resolution, and to all those who voted in favour of it, the
delegation of Egypt expresses greater frustration and
disappointment at the continued obstruction on the part
of the United States of ceasefire efforts by the main
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Where does the United States voting stand vis-à-vis
the human suffering that has, after 20 weeks of war on
Gaza, become catastrophic? How can we be called a
rules-based international community when our pleas
for those rules to be applied fall on deaf ears? Did the
Secretary-General’s invocation of Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations not reveal the action
required of the Security Council? Does the decision
of the International Court of Justice, which requested
specific action, not make clear the immediate need
for a ceasefire? Are the reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East about
the catastrophic nature of the current humanitarian
situation in Gaza, particularly on the border with Egypt
in Rafah, not sufficient to convince the United States
delegation to vote in favour of a ceasefire after 140 days
into the conflict and more than 30,000 people, mostly
women and children, having lost their lives as a result
of the unjust war in Gaza?
Egypt was the first Arab country to make peace
with Israel, and Egypt is the country that is most eager
to pursue the stability of the Middle East. While the
Security Council continues to fail to stop the war, Egypt
will continue to bear the brunt of the political, security
and humanitarian burden of the crisis. However, Egypt
is determined to strive arduously and continuously at
all levels to stop the bloodshed, to halt the destructive
war and to restore a political horizon in order to realize
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples’ hopes for security
and stability, in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, including the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Egypt is negotiating and mediating with the utmost
seriousness — in coordination with the United States,
Qatar, Israel and the Palestinian side — to expedite the
release of detainees, hostages and Palestinian prisoners
and to hasten the delivery of humanitarian aid to the
greatest extent possible in order to put an end to the
catastrophic humanitarian situation in Gaza, to save our
Palestinian brothers from the unjust siege imposed on
them by the Israeli occupation authorities and to oppose
all Israeli attempts to impose the forced displacement
of the Palestinian people, with the aim of liquidating
their noble cause.
Egypt calls on the Security Council and all
responsible international Powers to salvage the
peace option by immediately enforcing a ceasefire.
Doing so will not hinder ongoing mediation efforts,
but will instead create conditions conducive to their
success. Let us negotiate and mediate the flow of
humanitarian aid, restore calm and heal the wounds
of the injured — especially orphaned children and
bereaved mothers — instead of negotiating amid the
destruction and wreckage left by the devastating Israeli
war machine.
Egypt’s call to all Council members is clear and
simple: ceasefire now. I hope that no party will ever
again fail to comprehend that noble and direct message,
whose sole aim is to protect civilians in a manner devoid
of political calculations. Egypt once again warns of the

20/02/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9552
24-04552 21/21
catastrophic dangers facing our Palestinian brethren as
a result of the announced Israeli plans to storm the city
of Rafah. Egypt also warns that the regional situation
will continue to deteriorate should this destructive
war continue.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Earlier we heard the representative of Israel put a
question to the Chinese delegation. In response, we
would like to say that every life is precious and that
every life has the right to be protected.
Regarding the representative of Israel’s reference
to the Israeli citizen being detained, Noa, her mother
was once a national of China. Recently, our diplomats
here in New York met with Noa’s friends at the request
of the Permanent Mission of Israel. Like her friends and
family, we hope that Noa can return home soon. In fact,
China has never stopped calling for the prompt release
of all those who are detained.
Therefore, we hope that, with the mediation of Egypt
and Qatar, there will be progress on Israel’s negotiation
with Hamas. As we have repeatedly emphasized, the
collective punishment of Palestinian civilians is not the
right response. That will only be counterproductive.
The only way towards peace between the two countries
is to implement the two-State solution in order to
avoid a greater disaster. The pressing priority is an
immediate ceasefire. We hope that Israel will listen to
the overwhelming voice of the international community
and, after listening to the voices of Council members
and other countries, it should make the right judgement
call rather than changing the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
