DECLARATION OF INTERVENTION OF SPAIN
UNDER ARTICLE 63 OF THE STATUTE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
For the attention of the Registrar of the International Court of Justice, the undersigned
being duly authorized by the Government of Spain:
1. It is my honour to submit to the Court, on behalf of the Government of Spain, a
declaration of intervention in the case concerning Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip {South Africa v.
Israel}, under Article 63(2) of the Statute of the Court.
2. Paragraphs 1 and 5 of Article 82 of the Rules of Court stipulate that a State which
desires to avail itself of the right of intervention conferred upon it by Article 63 of the
Statute shall file a declaration to that effect, specifying the case and the convention to
which it relates, and containing:
(a) particulars of the basis on which the declarant State considers itself a party to
the convention;
(b) identification of the particular provisions of the convention the construction of
which it considers to be in question;
(c) a statement of the construction of those provisions for which it contends;
(d) a list of the documents in support, which documents shall be attached .
3. These matters are addressed below, in order, following some observations
concerning the proceedings.
I. LEGAL PROCESS BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
4. On 29 December 2023, South Africa filed with the Registry of the Court an Application
Instituting Proceedings against the State of Israel alleging violations by the latter, in the
Gaza Strip, of its obligations under the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (hereinafter, the Genocide Convention) .
5. Following South Africa's requests, the Court adopted provisional measures on 26
January, 28 March and 24 May 2024.
6. By an order of 5 Ap ril 2024, the Court fixed 28 October 2024 and 28 July 2025 as the
respective time-limits for the filing of the Memorial of the Republic of South Africa and
the Counter-Memorial of the State of Israel.
7. On 6 February 2024, the Registrar of the Court duly notified the Government of Spain
that South Africa's application invoked the 1948 Genocide Convention " both as a basis
of the Court's jurisdiction and as a substantive basis of the Applicant' s cla ims on the
merits. In particular, the Applicant seeks to found the Court's jurisdiction on the
1

compromissory clause contained in Article IX of the Genocide Convention and alleges
violations of Articles I, Ill, IV, V and VI of the Convention . It therefore appears that the
construction of this instrument will be in question in the case" . It is in this context that
Spain is exercising its right to intervene under Article 63(2) of the Statute of the Court.
8. It is not Spain's intention to become a party in the proceedings, and it accepts that
the interpretation of the Genocide Convention given by the judgement will be equally
binding upon it.
9. This declaration of intervention has been submitted, as stipulated in Article 82 of the
Rules of Court, "as soon as possible, and not later than the date fixed for the filing of the
last written pleading." Spain requests that it be provided with copies of all of the
submissions by South Africa and Israel, including any annexes, pursuant to Article 85(1)
of the Rules of Court.
10. This interpretation may be further developed in any written statements submitted
by Spain following the ruling of the Court on the admissibility of this declaration of
intervention.
11. Finally, this Declaration of Intervention is without detriment to Spain's unequivocal
condemnation of the brutal, indiscriminate and unjustified terrorist attacks committed
by Hamas against Israel on October 7, 2023. Spain firmly condemns the targeting of
Israeli and foreign civilians by Hamas and the taking of hostages on that date.
11. BACKGROUND OF SPAIN'S ACCESSION TO THE CONVENTION
12. Spain acceded to the Genocide Convention and deposited its instrument of
accession pursuant to Article XI, paragraph 4 of the Convention, on 13 September 1968,
with a reservation in respect of the whole Article IX (Jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice); Spain withdrew the reservation on 31 July 2009, with effect from 24
September 2009.
111. PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION IN QUESTION AND PROPOSED INTERPRETATION
13. Spain considers that the provisions of the Genocide Convention that are being
queried in the case put to the Court are Articles I, II, Ill, IV, V, VI and IX. Spain's
interpretation of said articles is divided into the following sections:
• General comments on the Genocide Convention
• Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (Article IX}
• The concept of Genocide (Article II in connection with Article Ill)
2

• Obligations of Contracting Parties {Articles I, 111, IV, V and VI, in connectio n
with Article II)
1. General comments on the Genocide Convention
14. Spain considers the Genocide Convention a crucial instrument in international law to
prevent and punish genocide. According to it, any act committed with an intent to
destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group constitutes a
crime under international law. The Court has recognized this prohibition against
genocide as a peremptory Uus cogens) norm, a view supported by both the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia {ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda {ICTR). The same conclusion has been reached recently by the International
Law Commission in its work on "Peremptory norms of International Law Uus cogens)".
The rights and obligations enshrined by the Convention are owed to the international
community as a whole (erga omnes rights and obligations), as the Court established in
its 1951 Advisory Opinion 1 as well as in its subsequent jurisprudence2.
15. Spain would like to emphasize that, under this interpretation, the Genocide
Convention is not only a criminal law treaty. It also contains elements clearly linked to
the protection and safeguarding of fundamental values and principles of international
law, including the protection of human dignity and the principle of accountability, and
imposes substantive obligations on Contracting Parties that go beyond ensuring the
criminal prosecution of the crime of genocide. As the Court has said in the present case,
"[t]he provisions of the Convention are intended to protect the members of a national,
ethnical, racial or religious group from acts of genocide or any other punishable acts
enumerated in Article Ill. The Court thus considers that there is a correlation between
the rights of members of groups protected under the Genocide Convention, the
obligations incumbent on States parties thereto, and the right of any State party to seek
compliance therewith by another State party". 3
16. It is also important to distingu ish between the international responsibility of the
State for violation of obligations under the Convention, on the one hand, and individual
criminal responsibility for committing a crime of genocide, on the other. While individual
criminal re spons ibility derives solely from perpetration of the crime of genocide as
defined in the Convention and other international in struments, the international
responsibility of a State may arise from violation of a broader set of obligations
1Reservations ta the Convention on Genocide, Advisory Opinion : I.CJ. Reports 1951, p. 23.
2 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Pun ishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia
v. Myanmar}, Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2022, p. 42, para . 107.
3 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza
Strip (South Africa v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of 26 January 2024, p. 15, para. 43 . See also
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia
v. Myanmar}1 Provisional Measures1 Order of 23 January 2020, I.CJ. Reports 2020, p. 21, para . 52.
3

established by the Convention itself, which include obligations to prevent and punish
genocide. As the Court has noted, this distinction is crucial to properly defining the scope
and meaning of the Convention. 4
2. Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (Article IX).
17. Article IX of the Genocide Convention reads as follows:
"Disputes between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation,
application or fulfilment of the present Convention, including those relating to
the responsibility of a State for genocide or for any of the other acts enumerated
in article Ill, shall be submitted to the International Court of Justice at the request
of any of the parties to the dispute."
18. As the Court noted in the case Ukraine v. Russia, two elements are required to
determine whether Article IX is a basis for its jurisdiction: a) the existence of a dispute
between the two parties existing prior to the filing of the complaint; b) that the actions
or omissions of the respondent complained of by the claimant fall within the scope of
the Genocide Convention, the sole basis of jurisdiction claimed 5. The Court has already
put forward its view that both conditions are met prima facie in the present case. Spain
re serves its right to further e_laborate on the interpretation of Article IX, if this
declaration of intervention is declared admissible.
3. The concept of Genocide (Article II in connection with Article Ill}
19. The fundamental components of the crime of genocide are:
a) the legally protected good: the legally protected subject is a "national, ethnical, racial
or religious group, as such".
b) the wilful nature of the act: the mens rea or do/us special is, which is to say the intent
to destroy a protected group in whole or in part.
c) the act itself: the actus reus, or the acts that constitute genocide.
a) The legally protected good: the national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as
such
4 See Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia
and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007, pp. 115-116, paras. 170-
174.
5 Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation : 32 States Intervening), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.CJ.
Reports 2024, pp. 32 and 54, paras. 40 and 136.
4

20. Genocide aims to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group, as such, which has the legally protected good 6. As the Court noted in 1951 and
recalled in 2007 and 2015, one of the purposes of the Convention is the safeguarding of
"the very existence of certain human groups" 7. This characteristic separates genocide
from war crimes or crimes against humanity8, the prohibition of which protects
individuals and not groups. This is why it is important, first and foremost, to determine
whether a group exists.
21. It is the opinion of Spain that "the Palestinians" constitute a national, ethnical, racial
or religious group in the sense of Article II of the Genocide Convention, as they meet the
criteria established by jurisprudence : they are a stable or permanent group 9, members
belong automatically by birth 10, individuals cannot belong through individual
commitments11, and the status of member is unalterable12, among other criteria .
Furthermore, the "Palestinians in Gaza" are unquestionably "a part" of the group of "the
Palestinians", as they also meet all of the requirements established in jurisprudence :
they constitute a substantial part of a particular group 13, they are located in a
geographically limited area 14, they are in an area controlled by the alleged perpetrator
of the crime 15 and they may be distinguished from the rest of the group, which is to say
that the perpetrators can identify them as a separate entity to be destroyed as such 16.
6 As stated by the ICTR in the Akayesu judgment: "In concrete terms, for any of the acts charged under
Article 2 (2) of the Statute to be a constitutive element of genocide, the act must have been committed
against one or several individua ls, because such individual or individuals were members of a specific
group, and specifically because they belonged to this group. Thus, the victim is chosen not because of his
individual identity, but rather on account of his membership of a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group. The victim of the act is therefore a member of a group, chosen as such, wh ich, hence, means that
the victim of the crime of genocide is the group itself and not only the individual." (Prosecutor v. Akayesu,
(Case No. ICTR-96-4-T}, Judgment, 2 September 1998, para . 521).
7 Reservations to the Convention on Genocide, Advisory Opinion: I.CJ. Reports 1951, p. 23; Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v.
Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007 {I), p. 125, para. 194; and Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), Judgment,
I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 64, para . 139.
8 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide {Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 62, para. 132.
9 ICTR, ICTR, Prosecutor v. Rutaganda, {Case No. ICTR-96-3-T), Judgment of 6 December 1999, para. 57.
10 ICTR, Prosecutor v. Akayesu (Case No . ICTR-96-4-T}, Judgment of 2 September.
11 ICTY, Prosecutor v. Goran Jelisic {Case, N!!. IT-95-10-T), Judgement, 14 December 1999.
12 ICTR, Prosecutor v. Akayesu (Case No . ICTR-96-4-T}, Judgment of 2 September 1998.
13 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide {Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007 {I) pp. 126-127, para . 198 and 201;
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 65, para . 142.
14 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007 {!), p. 126, para . 199; Application
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide {Croatia v. Serbia),
Judgment, I. CJ. Reports 2015, p. 65, para. 142.
15 Ibid.
16 ICTY, Prosecutor v Krstic (Case /T-98-33-T), Judgement of 02 August 2001, para. 590.
5

In fact, the Court, in its orders on provisional measures, has always used the expression
"the Palestinians in Gaza" .
b) mens rea
22. As has previously been unanimously ruled by the Court and by international criminal
courts, it is not sufficient solely for the acts described in Article to be perpetrated, they
must be perpetrated with the "intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical,
racial or religious group, as such 11
•
23. It is challenging to prove that this requirement has been met, and thus identify "the
process whereby such an intent may be inferred from the individual conduct of
perpetrators of the acts contemplated in Article II of the Convention" 17 . It is logical to
seek do/us specialis, first, in the State's policy, although such intent will seldom be
expressly stated. Alternatively, the do/us specialis may be established by indirect
evidence, i. e., deduced or inferred from certain types of conduct 18 .
24. In Spain' s opinion, precisely because direct evidence of genocidal intent is rare, it is
crucial to interpret the do/us specialis requirement with a balanced approach that
recognizes the singular gravity ofthe crime of genocide, without rendering the threshold
for inferring genocidal intent so difficult to meet so as to make findings of genocide near-
impossible.
25. In this regard, Spain considers that the standard adopted by the Court in Croatia v.
Serbia provides the basis for such a balanced approach . The Court highlights the central
importance of reasonableness by observing that "[t]he notion of 'reasonableness' must
necessarily be regarded as implicit in the reasoning of the Court," 19 not least to avoid an
approach that would make it "impossible to reach conclusions by way of inference." 20
Thus, when determining whether specific intent can be inferred from conduct or not,
one must weigh the evidence, and filter out inferences that are not reasonable. Put
differently, the "only reasonable inference" test applies only between alternative
explanations that have been found to be reasonably supported by the evidence.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the Court stated that the "only reasonable
inference" test should be used with respect to drawing an inference of specific intent
from a "pattern" of conduct only. This cannot be the threshold of the test when other
methods of inference are also present, such as when examining the scope and severity
of a perpetrator's conduct to evidence specific intent.
17 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2015, p. 66, para . 145.
18 Ibid. para. 143.
19 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v.
Serbia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2015, p. 67, para . 148.
20 Ibid.
6

26. When assessing whether specific intent can be inferred, one must assess the
available evidence comprehensively and holistically. The jurisprudence of international
criminal courts demonstrates that this approach is not only desirable, but also an
important element of sound administration of justice. In this respect, Spain draws
attention to the approach of the ICTY Appeals Chamber, which required trial chambers
to assess "whether all of the evidence, taken together, demonstrated a genocidal
mental state," while noting that a "compartmentalized mode of analysis [would]
obscur[e] the proper inquiry." 21 In this sense, the gravity and intensity of the acts
included in the material element of genocide may also help to establish specific intent.
27. Lastly, when assessing the do/us specia/is in this case, the Court may find it useful to
refer to statements and declarations of members of the government of Israel, such as,
for example, the statement made by the Israeli Defence Minister, Yoav Gallant, on 9
October 2023, that was broadcast by several television outlets, and documented in
numerous written media : "We are imposing complete siege on Gaza. There will be no
electricity, no food, no water, no fuel. Everything will be closed. We are fighting against
human animals and we are acting accordingly", or the televised address by the Israeli
Minister for National Security, ltamar Ben-Gvir, on 10 November 2023: "[t]o be clear,
when we say that Ha mas should be destroyed, it also means those who celebrate, those
who support, and those who hand out candy - they're all terrorists, and they should
also be destroyed." Spain recalls that on 28 December 2023, a group of forme r senior
members of Israel's diplomatic corps, academics, journalists, former members of
Knesset and social activists addressed a letter to Israel's Attorney General and other
judicial authorities to demand their action to stop what they define as "extensive and
blatant incitement to genocide, expulsion, and ethnic cleansing in Gaza by public
figures" 22 . The letter contains a list of statements by Israeli officials that the signatories
thereof consider the Israeli judiciary should act upon, because they believe they breach
both Israeli and international law.
c) actus reus
28. According to Article II, the acts that may constitute genocide are: "(a) Killing
members of the group; (b) Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the
group; (c) Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about
its physical destruction in whole or in part; (d) Imposing measures intended to prevent
births within the group; (e) Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group".
21 Prosecutor v. Stakic {Case No . /T-97-24-A}, Appeals Judgment of 22 March 2006, para . SS .
22 "Israeli public figures accuse judiciary of ignoring incitement to genocide in Gaza", Jewish Voice for
Labour, 6 January 2024, https://www.jewishvoiceforlabour.org.uk/article/israeli-public-figures-accuse-
judiciary-of-ignoring-incitement-to-genocide-in-gaza/ and "Israeli public figures accuse judiciary of
ignoring incitement to genocide in Gaza", The Guardian, 3 January 2024,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/jan/03/israeli-public-figures-accuse-jud iciary-of-ignoring-
incitement-to-gen ocide-i n-gaza .
7

29. The Court has established that, in order to constitute genocide, all acts must be
carried out with the intention to destroy, in whole or in part, a protected group as such 23 .
When the intention is not explicitly stated, the dimension of these acts, their gravity and
their indiscriminate nature when targeting the members of the group, might be
interpreted as indications of such an intention.
30. Spain considers that, when assessing whether the acts described in Article II of the
Convention have been committed, the International Court of Justice, as the primary
judicial body of the United Nations, should take into account the data, facts and reports
produced by the United Nations, its agencies and bodies, and by other reliable sources
with authoritative knowledge of the situation in Gaza. In Spain's view, examining the
results of independent investigations under the auspices of the United Nations before
qualifying a situation as genocide is a good practice that should be applied to the present
case 24 .
31. In its 2020 Resolution on Prevention of Genocide, the Human Rights Council
recognized this good practice when it reaffirmed the role that the United Nations
system, including the Council itself as well as relevant special procedures and treaty
bodies, and regional organizations, can play in "the early detection and prevention of
massive, serious and systematic violations of human rights that, if not halted, could lead
to genocide" 25 .
32. Spain considers that it would be particularly valuable for the Court to carefully
examine the issue of the lack of access for humanitarian assistance to the Gaza Strip,
despite the various times that the Court has referred to this matter in the provisional
measures indicated with respect to this case. Spain considers that the blockade of
humanitarian assistance is leading to conditions of life in the Gaza Strip that could fall
under paragraph c) of Article II of the Convention; Spain will elaborate on this point at a
later stage if its declaration is declared admissible.
23 In the words of the Court; "the serious bodily or mental harm within the mea·ning of Article II (b) of the
Convention must be such as to contribute to the physical or biological destruction of the group, in whole
or in part" (Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
{Croatia v. Serbia), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2015, p. 70, para . 157); the "Deliberate infliction on the group
of conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part, within the
meaning of Article II (c) of the Convention, covers methods of physical destruction, other than killing,
whereby the perpetrator ultimately seeks the death of the members of the group" (ibid. p. 71, para. 161);
or even that the measures intended to prevent births within the group "the circumstances of the
commission of those acts, and their consequences, are such that the capacity of members of the group to
procreate is affected" (Ibid. p. 73, para . 166).
24 See for example the reliance of The Gambia on the reports of the Independent International Fact-
Finding Mission on Myanmar established by the United Nations Human Rights Council before bringing a
case to the Court. Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide {The Gambia v. Myanmar), Judgment of 22 July 2022, pp . 25-27, paras 65-69.
25 United Nations Human Rights Council, Resolution 43/29 on the prevention of genocide of 22 June
2020 (A/H RC/RES43/29), paras. 4, 5, 10 and 11.
8

33. The provisional measures ordered by the Court with respect to this case (26 January,
28 March, 24 May 2024) require Israel to take measures to allow humanitarian
assistance to enter the area. On 26 January, the Court, with 16 votes in favour and one
against, ordered Israel to "take immediate and effective measures to enable the
provision of urgently needed basic services and humanitarian assistance to address the
adverse conditions of life faced by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip" 26. On 28 March, the
Court unanimously ruled that Israel must "take all necessary and effective measures to
ensure, without delay, in full co-operation with the United Nations, the unhindered
provision at scale by all concerned of urgently needed basic services and humanitarian
assistance, including food, water, electricity, fuel, shelter, clothing, hygiene and
sanitation requirements, as well as medical supplies and medical care to Palestinians
throughout Gaza, including by increasing the capacity and number of land crossing
points and maintaining them open for as long as necessary" 27 . Lastly, on 24 May, the
Court stated that "the catastrophic situation in Gaza confirms the need for the
immediate and effective implementation of the measures indicated in its Orders of 26
January 2024 and 28 March 2024, which are applicable throughout the Gaza Strip,
including in Rafah. In these circumstances, the Court finds it necessary to reaffirm the
measures indicated in those Orders. In so doing, the Court wishes to emphasize that the
measure indicated in paragraph 51 (2) (a) of its Order of 28 March 2024, requiring the
'unhindered provision at scale by all concerned of urgently needed basic services and
humanitarian assistance', necessitates that the Respondent maintain open land crossing
points, and in particular the Rafah crossing" 28. Accordingly, the Court decided, by
thirteen votes to two, to order Israel to "maintain open the Rafah crossing for
unhindered provision at scale of urgently needed basic services and humanitarian
assistance" 29.
34. With regard to this same matter, Spain considers that the destruction of basic
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip is contributing to an unprecedented humanitarian crisis
and a severe worsening of living conditions for the Palestinian population in Gaza.
According to the Gaza Strip Interim Report Damage Assessment, "Hospitals, schools, UN
facilities, and other protected sites continue to be severely impacted by the conflict, as
a result service delivery as well as the delivery of humanitarian aid is impeded or halted.
The acute shortage of electricity supply or fuel for backup electricity generators has had
a severe impact on patient care, including for newborns. A sharp increase in infectious
diseases has been observed, due to overcrowding in hospitals, destruction of water and
26 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza
Strip (South Africa v. Israel}, Provisional Measures, Order of 26 January 2024, p. 24 para 86 (3).
27 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza
Strip (South Africa v. Israel), Provisional Measures, Order of 28 March 2024, p. 12 para . 51 (2)(a).
28 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza
Strip (South Africa v. Israel}, Provisional Measures, Order of 24 May 2024, p. 13 para 52.
29 ibid . p.14 para. 57(2)(b).
9

sanitation systems, and decreased availability of health services. The minimal availability
of food, drinking water, and cooking gas across Gaza is causing severe levels of food
insecurity as families run out of ways to cope while living in extremely dire conditions" 30.
35. The same report estimates that around US$18.5 billion in direct damages had been
caused to the built infrastructure of the Gaza Strip by the end of January 2024, which
amounted to around 97% of the total 2022 gross domestic product (GDP) of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. According to the report, "the physical and the corresponding
monetary impacts caused by the conflict are dominated by damages to residential
buildings (72% of the total), followed by damages to the physical assets of the
Commerce, Industry, and Services sector (9% of the total), while effects on other critical
infrastructure such as education, WASH, health, energy, ICT, municipal services,
transport account for the remaining 19%".31 . The findings of the report include that, by
the end of January 2024, the ongoing conflict had damaged or destroyed approximately
62% of all homes in Gaza equivalent to 290,820 housing units and 84% of all health
facilities at a cost of U$554 million, severely impacting Gaza's health system; had
brought the education system to a complete halt, with damage to education
infrastructure amounting to US$341 million; had destroyed or severely damaged
numerous sites of significant heritage value, representing diverse historical periods and
cultures; had affected nearly four in five commerce, industry, and services sector
establishments, which in turn had forced economic activities to a halt, and had driven a
more than 50% rise in unemployment. Also, the agricultural sector showed substantial
levels of destruction, with overall estimated damages of U$629 million, threatening
livelihoods and aggravating food insecurity of the entire population. The report also
showed that energy, water and municipal sectors had been affected by damages
estimated at nearly US$800 million, forcing basic service delivery to a halt and hindering
relief activities with rapidly increasing multi-dimensional poverty as a result . Damages
to the transport and information and communications technology (ICT) sectors were
estimated at US$448 million, affecting communication, mobility, and the provision of
humanitarian aid to the population. Finally, environmental damages were estimated at
US$411 million, adversely affecting physical assets such as coastal areas, water, soil,
agricultural fields, and the Wadi Gaza Nature Reserve, along with vital ecosystem
services32 .
36. Given that, as established by the jurisprudence of the Court, each of the acts listed
in Article II of the Convention must be accompanied by the intention to destroy a group,
in whole or in part, Spain considers, as already stated in paragraph 27, that the Court
may find it useful also in this respect to refer to statements and declarations of members
30 Gaza Strip - Interim Damage Assessment: Summary Note, World Bank, European Union and United
Nations, 29 March 2024.
31 Ibid. p. 6.
32 Ibid. pp. 11-16.
10

of the government of Israel, such as, for example, the statement made on 12 October
2023 by the then Minister of Energy and Infrastructure of Israel, Israel Katz, on his X
account, which read : "The line has been crossed . We will fight the terrorist organ ization
Ha mas and destroy it. All the civi li an population in Gaza is ordered to leave immediately.
We will win . They will not receive a drop of water or a single battery until they leave the
world."
37. The Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied
Palestinian Territory of 27 May 2024 includes information on the order signed by
Minister Katz on 7 October 2023 to cut all electricity supplies to the Gaza Strip, followed
by the cutting off of all water supply from Mekorot through the three connection
pipelines to the Gaza Strip, as well as the complete halt, between 8 October and 14
November, of any fuel entering the territory. Acco rding to the International
Commission's report, "The impact of these measures on the availability of electricity and
water was immediate. By 14 October, the three water desalination plants, which had
previously produced 21 million liters of drinking water a day, were reported to have
halted operations due to the lack of electricity and fuel. Israel's cutting of wate r supply
immediately affected more than 650,000 people. The Gaza Power Plant ceased
operation on 11 October after fuel transportation through the Kerem Shalom Crossing
was stopped." 33
38. Finally, a number of acts not provided for explicitly in Article II may ultimately result
in genocidal acts. Thus, for example, although forced displacement of persons does not
in and of itself amount to a listed underlying act of genocide, it may, depending on the
facts, lead to the underlying acts of genocide set out in Article ll(b)34 and Article ll(c)35 of
the Genocide Convention. Similarly, under current conventional and customary
33 Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and Israel: Advance Unedited Version (A/HRC/56/26), United Nations, 27 May
2024, p. 11 para. 51.
34 In relation to Article ll(b), ICTY noted that "forced displacement may - depending on the circumstances
of the case - inflict serious mental harm, by causing grave and long-term disadva ntage to a person's
ability to lead a normal and constructive life so as to contribute or tend to contribute to the destructi on
of the group as a whole or a part thereof." (ICTY, Prosecutor v. Tolimir {Case No. IT-05-88/2-A), Appeal
Judgment of 8 April 2015, p. 86 para . 209). Similarly, in Prosecutor v. Karodzic the ICTY Trial Chamber held
that "while forcible t ransfer does not of itself constitute an act of genocide, depending on the
circumsta nces of a given case, it may cause such serious bodily or ment al harm as to constitute an act of
genocide under Article 4(2)(b)" (ICTY, Prosecutor v. Karodzic (Case No. /T-95-5/18-T}, 24 March 2016 para.
545) .
35 In relation to Article ll(c), the Court has held that deliberate infliction on the group of conditions of life
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part, covers methods of physical
destruction, other than killi ng, whereby the perpetrator ultimately seeks the death of t he members of the
group, such as via thei r expulsion from their homes (Application of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide {Croatia v. Serbia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2015, p. 71 para. 161.
See also ICTR, Prosecutor v. Akayesu {Case No . ICTR-96-4-T), Judgment of 2 September 1998, para . 506) .
Importantly, the opportunity to destroy a protected group is not based solely on the immediate effects
of a perpetrator' s act s. A perpetrator may allow some group members to flee, but if those members are
subsequently subjected to conditions of life calculated to bring about their physica l destruction, these
acts may fall within the scope of Article ll(c) of the Genocide Convention .
11

international law, the intentional destruction of cultural heritage does not fall within the
categories of acts of genocide set out in Article II of the Genocide Convention, as
expressly stated by this Court. Nonetheless, the Court has endorsed the ICTY
observation made in the Krstic case whereby "where there is physical or biological
destruction there are often simultaneous attacks on the cultural and religious property
and symbols of the targeted group as well, attacks which may legitimately be considered
as evidence of an intent to physically destroy the group." 36 Spain considers this approach
to express current international law and accurately interpret Article II of the Genocide
Convention .
4. Obligations of Contracting Parties (Articles I, Ill, IV, V, and VI, in connection
with Article II)
39. Specifically determining the scope of these articles is crucial to ensuring respect for
the Convention and its full implementation. As the Court previously stated,
interpretation must take into account the interpretation criteria set out in Articles 31
and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, paying due attention to the
object and purpose of the Genocide Convention, which are expressions of the moral
value that the States wish to attribute to them at the time of adoption. 37 The following
paragraphs set out Spain's interpretation of the obligations arising from the Convention,
which may be elaborated on in any written statements ultimately submitted .
40. As established in the jurisprudence of the Court, the Convention sets out three
substantive obligations for Contracting Parties: i) the obligation not to commit acts of
genocide or the acts listed in Article 111; ii) the obligation to prevent the perpetration of
acts of genocide or the acts listed in Article 111; and iii) the obligation to punish acts of
genocide and the other acts listed in Article Ill. These obligations may apply separately
or jointly to a specific case; therefore, examination of their scope should take into
account the specific circumstances in each case. 38
41. Determination of the scope of these obligations calls for consideration of the fact
that -as previously stated- they are all ergo omnes obligations and the prohibition of
genocide is a peremptory norm Uus cogens) 39 . Similarly, it must be taken into account
that these obligations apply in times of war and in times of peace and that they are
applicable to Contracting Parties irrespective of where acts of genocide are committed,
with the sole exception of the obligation to apply criminal law, which is limited to crimes
of genocide perpetrated within a Contracting Party's territory.
36 ICTY, Prosecutor v Krstic (Case /T-98-33-T}, Judgement of 02 August 2001, para . 580.
37 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro}, Judgment, /.C.J. Reports 2007, p. 43, paras. 160 et seq.
38 Ibid. paras. 382 and 383 .
39 See Section 111.1, paragraph 14 hereof.
12

a) The obligation to not commit genocide (Article I, in relation to Articles II and II/)
42. Although the obligation of States to not commit genocide is not explicitly set out in
the Genocide Convention, the Court has expressed its opin ion that it exists as an
obligation arising from the Convention, as "taking into account the established purpose
of the Convention, the effect of Article I is to prohibit States from themselves committing
genocide".40 The Court has clearly and unmistakeably indicated "that Contracting Parties
to the Convention are bound not to commit genocide, through the actions of their
organs or persons or groups whose acts are attributable to them. That conclusion must
also apply to the other acts enumerated in Article Ill. Those acts are forbidden along with
genocide itself in the list included in Article 111".41
43. Spain agrees with the Court' s interpretation that there is an obligation to not commit
genocide, arising from the Genocide Convention, which is binding for all Contracting
Parties. In light of this obligation, States must abstain from committing any of the acts
listed in Articles II and Ill.
b) The obligation to prevent (Articles I and V, in connection with Articles II and II/)
44. Under Article I of the Convention, Contracting Parties "undertake to prevent and to
punish" "genocide, whether committed in time of peace or in time of war". Under Article
V, the "Contracting Parties undertake to enact, in accordance with their respective
Constitutions, the necessary legislation to give effect to the provisions of the present
Convention and, in particular, to provide effective penalties for persons guilty of
genocide or of any of the other acts enumerated in article Ill".
45 . In this case, the provisional measures adopted by the Court on 26 January, 28 March
and 24 May 2024 offer clear instructions on how Israel must meet its obligation of
prevention . As the Court itself has stated "it is not possible, when considerin g the way
[a Contracting Party] discharge[s] its obligation of prevention under the Convention, to
fail to take account of the obligation incumbent upon it, albeit on a different basis, to
implement the provisional measures indicated by the Court".42 This is particularly
important in this case, as in the Order of the Court of 26 January 2024, on provisional
measures, the Court explicitly ordered Israel "in accordance with its obligations under
the Genocide Convention", to adopt "all measures within its power t o prevent the
commission" of acts of genocide {Article II), acts of direct and public instigation to
commit genocid e {Article Ill), as well as to "prevent the destruction and ensure the
40 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Pun ishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.CJ. Reports 2007, p. 113 para. 166.
41 Ibid. pp. 114 and 118-119, paras 167 and 179.
42 Ibid. p. 184 para 435 .
13

preservation of evid ence related to the allegations of acts within the scope of Article II
and Article Ill of the Genocide Convention against members of the Palestinian group in
the Gaza Strip".43 The provisional measures were reiterated by the Court in its orders of
28 March and 24 May.
46. Spain considers that these provisional measures, which are binding for Israel and
contain specific instructions relating to the obligation to prevent acts of genocide, should
be taken into account when examining whether it has fulfilled its obligation to prevent
genocide, as a Contracting Party to the Convention.
c) The obligation to punish {Articles I, Ill, IV, V and VI, in connection with Article II)
47. Under Article I of the Convention, Contracting Parties "undertake to prevent and to
punish" "genocide, whether committed in time of peace or in time of war". This general
obligation is elaborated on in Articles Ill, IV, V and VI. The obligation to punish is more
clearly defined in the Convention than the obligation to prevent and comprises elements
such as enacting legislation to define the crime of genocide and related crimes at the
national level; establishing punishments that are appropriate for the severity of these
crimes; establish in g jurisdiction of national courts over crimes of genocide and other
acts committed within national territories; and effectively applying penal jurisdiction,
includin g investigating, prosecuting and trying persons who may have committed such
crimes . Without prejudice to the possibility of submitting further clarifications at a later
point in the proceedings, Spain considers that the Court should pay particular attention
to the obligation to punish, in connection with the obligation arising from Article Ill of
the Convention to punish "direct and public incitement to commit genocide". In this
regard, Spain refers to the observations outlined in paragraph 27 of this declaration of
intervention.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
48. On the basis of the above, Spain avails itself of the right conferred by Article 63(2) of
the Statute of the Court to intervene in the proceedings of the case concerning
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide in the Gaza Strip {South Africa v. Israel). Spain believes that this declaration
meets the requirement s set out in Article 63 of the Statute and Article 82 of the Rules
and respectfully submits that the Court declare it admissible.
43 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza
Strip (South Africa v. Israel}, Provisional Measures, Order of 26 January 2024, pp. 23-26 paras. 78, 79, 81
and 86.
14

49. Spain reserves the right to supplement or amend this declaration, and any written
statements submitted with respect to it, as it considers necessary in response to
subsequent developments in these proceedings.
V. DOCUMENTS IN SUPPORT OF THE DECLARATION
50. The documents submitted in support of this declaration and annexed hereto are:
{a) Letter of 6 February 2024 from the Registrar of the International Court of Justice
to the Contracting Parties of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, of 9 December 1948.
{b) The instrument of accession of Spain to the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
{c) Withdrawal of the reservation submitted by Spain to Article IX of the Convention .
Yours Faithfully,
Consuelo Femenia Guardiola,
Ambassador of Spain in the Netherlands
Co-agent of the Government of Spain
Annex A: Letter of 6 February 2024 from the Registrar of the International Court of
Justice to the Contracting Parties of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, of 9 December 1948.
Annex B: The instrument of accession of Spain to the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
Annex C: Withdrawal of the reservation subm itted by Spain to Article IX of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
15

Bv email only
161308
COUR INTERNATIONAL(
DE JUSTICE
INTERNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTICE
6 Febrnary 2024
I have the honour to refer to my letter (No. 161 0 l 0) dated 3 January 2024 infonning your
Government that, on 29 December 2023, South Africa filed in the Registry of the Court an
Application instituting proceedings against the State of Israel in the case concerning Application of
!he Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v. Israel). A copy of the Application was appended to that letter. The text of the
Application is also available on the website of the Court (W \\·w .icj-ct.i.org.).
Article 63, paragraph I, of the Statute of the Court provides that:
[w]hencver the construction of a convention to which States other than those concerned
in the case are parties is in question, the Registrar shall notify all such States forthwith".
Further, under Article 43, paragraph I, of the Rules ofCourt :
''Whenever the construction of a convention to which States other than those
concerned in the case are parties may be in question within the meaning of Article 63,
paragraph 1, of the Statute, the Cout1 shall consider what directions shall be given to the
Registrar in the matter.'·
On the instructions of the Court, given in accordance with the smd provision of the Rules of
Court, I have the honour to notify your Government of the following .
In lhe above-mentioned Application, the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (heremafter the '·Genocide Convention") is invoked both as a basis of the
Cowi' sJurisdiction and as a substantive basis of the Applicant's claims on the merits. In particular,
the Applicant seeks to found the Court's jurisdiction on the compromissory clause contained in
Article IX of the Genocide Convention and alleges violations of Articles I, IIl, IV, V and VI of the
Convention . lt therefore appears that the construction of this instrument will be rn question in the
case.
[Letter to the States parties to the Genocide Convention
(except South Africa and Israel)]
Pala is de la Paix . Camegieplein 2
2517 KJ La Haye - Pays-Bas
Telephone +31 (0) 71) 302 23 23 - Facsimile : ·3 I (0) 70 364 99 28
Site Internet : www.icj-cij nrg
P~ace Palace, Camegieplcin 2
25 I7 KJ The Hagur - Netherlands
Telephom,: + 3 I (0\ 70 302 23 23 -·relefax ~ 31 (0) 70 364 9'l 28
W~hsite . www.icj-cij nrg

COUR INTERNATJONALE
DE JUSTICE
INTERNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTICE
Your country is included in the list of parties to the Genocide Convention . The present letter
should accordingly be regarded as the notification contemplated by Article 63, paragraph 1, of the
Statute. I would add that this notification in no way prejudges any question of the possible application
of Article 63, paragraph 2, of the Statute, which the Court may later be called upon to detennine in
this case.
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.
- 2 -
Philippe Gautier
Registrar

FEJ?.Ni.NDC ;l.A ::lLi Cl.STIEL-LA. Y MAIZ,
Cumplidos los requisi tos exigidos por la legialacil>n
espafiola, extiendo el presente Instrureento c1e J1dhesion de-
Espana al Convenio para lu I'revencion y la Sanci6n del deli to
de Genocidio apirobado por la Asamblea G~nere.1 de las Na ~ones
/
Unidas el 9 de diciembre de 1948_/'-con
.____
dad del Art1culo IX (jurisdicci6n. del
de Justicia)- a efectos de que, mediante
de conformidad con lo dispuesto
onvenio/
de su Arttcu
m fe de lo cual firmo e
•tisois
en Madrid , a vein-
sesenta y ocho.

I
JU AN CARLOS I
REY DE ESPANA
POR CVANTO el dia 13 de septiembre de 1968, el Estado espariol deposito en la Secretaria
General de las Naciones Unidas (Nueva York) el Instrumento de Adhesion al Convenio para la
prevencion y la sancion del delito de genocidio, hecho en Nueva York el 9 de diciembre de 1948,
inluyendo empero una Reserva a la totalidad del artfculo IX 0urisdiccion del Tribunal lnterna·
cional de Justicia),
Habiendo cambiado las circunstancias que motivaban esta Reserva y cumplidos los requi-
sitos exigidos por la Legislacion espafiola,
VENGO EN APROBAR la retirada de dicha Reserva, a cuyo efecto MANDO expedir el
presente Instrumento firmado por Mi, debidamente sellado y refrendado por el infrascrito
Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores y de Cooperacion.
Dado en Madrid, a /;tet..nfa !I~ dt! ;uuo de cbls nu/ n.tJ.e/X_.
E L MIN1S1RO DE ASUNTOS EXTERIORES Y DE COOPERACION.
Miguel Angel Morat1nos

UNITED NATIONS NATIONS UNIES
POSTAL AOORESS - AORESSE POSTALE . UNITED NATIONS. N.Y , 10017
CA8LE AODRESS-AORESSE TELEG"Ai-HIQVE · VHATIONS NIEWYO"K
Reference: C.N.635 .2009.TREATIES-2 (Depositary Notification)
CONVENTION ON THE PREVENTION AND PUNISHMENT OF THE CRIME
OF GENOCIDE
NEW YORK, 9 DECEMBER 1948
SPAIN: WITHDRAWAL OF THE RESERVATION IN RESPECT OF THE WHOLE OF ARTIC LE IX
(JURI SDICTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE)
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, acting in his capacity as depositary,
communicates the following :
The above action was effected on 24 September 2009.
(IV. I)
24 September 2009
Attent ion: Treaty Services of Ministries of Foreign Affairs and of international organizations concerned.
Depositary notifications are currently issued in both hard copy and electronic format. Depositary
notifications are made available IO the Permanent Missions to the Uni ted Nations at the following e-mail
address: missions@ un.int. Such notifications are also available in the United Nations Treaty Co llection on
the Internet at http ://treaties.u n.org, where interested individuals can subscribe to directly receive depositary
notifications by e-mail through a new automated subscription service. Depositary notifications are avai lable
for pick-up by the Permanent Missions in Room NL-300.

UNITED NATIONS NATIONS UNIES
POSTAL ADDRESS-A.ORESSE POSTALE UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. 10017
CABLE ADOAESS-AORESSE TELEG,.A~H IQ VE · UNATIONS NIEWYOAK
Reference : C.N.635 .2009.TREATIES-2 (Notification depositaire)
CONVENTION POUR LA PREVENTION ET LA REPRESSION DU CRIM E DE
GENOCIDE
NEW YORK, 9 DECEMBRE 1948
ESPAGNE: RETRAIT DE LA RESERVE CONCERNANT LA TOTALITE DE L' ART ICLE IX
( COMPETENCE DE LA COUR INT ERNA TI ON ALE DE JUSTIC E)
(IV.I)
Le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, agissant en sa qualite de depositaire,
communique :
L'action susmentionnee a ete effectuee le 24 septembre 2009.
Le 24 septembn: 2009
Attention : Les Services des traites des Ministeres des affaires etrangeres et des organisations
internationales concernes. Les notifications depositaires sont actuellement publiees en fo rmats papier et
electron ique. Les missions permanentes aupres des Nati ons Unies peuvent consulter Jes notifications
depositaires a l'adresse electronique suivante : missio ns@un. int. Ces notifications sont egalement
disponibles sur le site Internet de la Co ll ection des traites des Nations Unies a l'adresse
http://treaties.un.org, ou Jes personnes interessees peuvent souscrire au nouveau service automatise
d'abonnement pour recevoir directement des notifications depositaires par cou1Tiel. Les missions
pennanentes sont invitees ase procurer Jes notifications depositaires mises aleur disposition au bureau NL-
300.
