Accessible document Please recycleUnited Nations S/PV.9584
Security Council
Seventy-ninth year
9584th meeting
Friday, 22 March 2024, 9 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Yamazaki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Japan)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bendjama
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Jun
Ecuador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Gasca
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Guyana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett
Malta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Frazier
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Afonso
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hwang
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nebenzia
Sierra Leone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sowa
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Žbogar
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Baeriswyl
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . Dame Barbara Woodward
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0928 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
24-07904 (E)
*2407904*

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
2/14 24-07904
The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2024/239, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): For all the stories that have been written
about divisions in the Council — and there are many
real divisions — I believe most of us share many of
the same goals. First and foremost, we want to see an
immediate and sustained ceasefire as part of a deal
that leads to the release of all hostages being held by
Hamas and other groups and that will allow much more
lifesaving humanitarian aid to get into Gaza. Of course,
we cannot just want that to happen, we have to make
that happen. We have to do the hard work of diplomacy.
I know members have heard me say that a lot, and that
is because it is the truth.
A Security Council resolution means much less if it
is not actually made real on the ground. That is why the
United States, Egypt and Qatar are working around the
clock in the region to secure an immediate and sustained
ceasefire as part of a deal that leads to the release of all
hostages being held by Hamas and other groups — one
that will help us address the dire humanitarian crisis
in Gaza. We believe that we are close. We are not there
yet, unfortunately. And this moment is one in which the
Security Council has a critical role to play. By adopting
the draft resolution before us (S/2024/239), we can put
pressure on Hamas to accept the deal on the table.
Council members do not need me to tell them that
every day without a deal, meaning every day without
a ceasefire, leads to more needless suffering for more
than 100 hostages, including a one-year-old child, being
held in captivity by Hamas and other groups; for innocent
Palestinians in Gaza, who have been displaced, who
are starving and who desperately need peace; and for
Israelis who have continued to face missile attacks from
Hamas, a terrorist group that set this conflict in motion
on 7 October 2023. Every day without a deal means more
needless suffering.
This draft resolution will move us closer to securing
that deal and help us to alleviate that suffering, and I urge
all Council Members to vote yes. I urge them to vote
for a draft resolution that, at long last, condemns Hamas
for its horrific terrorist attacks and sexual violence;
that makes clear that all civilians — Palestinians and
Israelis — should be able to live without fear of violence;
that demands the protection of civilians in Gaza and
stresses that a major ground offensive into Rafah poses
a grave threat to civilians, even as we still work towards
eliminating Hamas from all parts of Gaza; that calls
on Israel to eliminate all barriers and restrictions to
humanitarian aid, especially as the threat of famine
looms large in northern Gaza; that condemns calls
to resettle Gaza and makes clear that the Palestinian
Authority should have ultimate authority over Gaza;
and that reiterates the Council’s support for a two-
State solution. This is a strong draft resolution. It is the
by-product of exhaustive and inclusive negotiations. It
reflects the consensus of the Council, and it does more
than just call for a ceasefire — it helps to make a ceasefire
possible. It would be a historic mistake for the Council
not to adopt this draft resolution, and I again urge all
Council members to vote yes.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For six months now, the Security Council has
been unable to adopt a draft resolution demanding a
ceasefire in Gaza. All attempts were repeatedly thwarted
by the opposition of the United States, which, in cold
blood, used its veto in this Chamber on four occasions.
In that time, we have heard a series of excuses from
our American colleagues. Either they said that it was
premature to seek a ceasefire because it was necessary to
give space to Israel’s so-called counter-terrorism efforts,
or they demanded that the Council not interfere with
Washington’s “effective diplomacy on the ground”, or
they asked for the Council to wait for Ramadan to begin,
when, apparently, an agreement on ending the violence
would definitely be reached.
Now, six months on, Gaza has been virtually
razed to the ground, and, without batting an eye, the
representative of the United States has asserted that

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 3/14
Washington is finally beginning to realize the need
for a ceasefire. Washington’s sluggish thought process
has cost the lives of 32,000 peaceful Palestinians, two
thirds of whom are women and children. Even now,
we are witnessing a typical hypocritical spectacle, in
which, under the guise of a ceasefire, the United States
is trying to sell something else to Council members
and the entire international community: namely, vague
wording about defining the imperative for a ceasefire.
Such philosophical passages about moral imperatives
are at home in the works of Immanuel Kant, but they
are not enough to save the lives of peaceful Palestinian
civilians. And this is absolutely not the mandate of the
Council, which has a unique mechanism for demanding
a ceasefire and, if necessary, enforcing it.
During an official interview in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,
on 20 March with an Al-Hadath correspondent, the
United States Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, said
“Well, in fact, we actually have a resolution
that we put forward right now that is before the
United Nations Security Council that does call
for an immediate ceasefire tied to the release of
hostages, and we hope very much that countries
will support that”.
However, there is no such call in the text of
the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2024/239), which has been put to the vote today. So,
it seems that either the Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations or the United States
Secretary of State have been deliberately misleading
the international community.
From the very onset, it has been clear that the so-
called negotiations that our American colleagues have
been conducting on this issue have been aimed merely
at stalling for time. All our comments and red lines have
been disregarded time and again, as were the proposals
from a number of other delegations. It was some kind
of speaking into the void rather than a normal approach
to working on a document. The American product is
exceedingly politicized, and the sole purpose of it is
to ride the wave of the pre-election period by throwing
voters a bone in the form of at least some mention
of a so-called ceasefire in Gaza, to establish the
political ambitions of the United States in the region
by creating terrorist labels and to ensure the impunity
of Israel, whose crimes are not even mentioned in the
draft resolution.
I wish to draw attention to the following. The draft
resolution produced by the United States actually gives
the green light for Israel to mount a military operation
in Rafah. At the very least, the authors try to make it so
that nothing in their draft resolution would prevent West
Jerusalem from completing its brutal cleansing of the
southern Gaza Strip. That is, in fact, what Washington
is trying to achieve. We have already stated that we will
no longer adopt pointless draft resolutions that do not
contain a call for a ceasefire and lead us nowhere. This
draft resolution should not be adopted by the majority
of members, to send the message that Washington’s not
even palliative, but devious concepts are unacceptable.
It would be very strange for us to see those members of
the Council — who are in the majority, who understand
that fact and who persuaded us of the deficiencies of
the United States draft resolution — to now raise their
hands to vote in favour of it.
If members do so, they will cover themselves with
shame. Consider once again: how will members be
seen by the people of the Middle East and by their own
people, if they support this hypocritical initiative, which
is designed to disorient the international community
and, essentially, to undermine the Council’s authority,
ensuring that it cannot have an impact on the situation
on the ground and that it does not get in the way of the
White House? Are members willing to play into their
hands, in this unsavoury spectacle? Russia will not do
so. As a permanent member of the Council and as one
of the founders of the United Nations, we recognize the
historical and global responsibility we shoulder for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
cannot allow the Council to become an instrument in the
advancement of Washington’s destructive policy in the
Middle East. If this draft resolution were to be adopted,
it would definitively close the door on discussions about
the need for a ceasefire in Gaza. It would free Israel’s
hands, and it would result in all of Gaza and its entire
population having to face destruction or expulsion.
We are not guided by what is convenient for
Washington and its satellites, who raise their hands
when told to do so by Washington. We do not follow
that lead. What guides us is what is necessary for the
Palestinian people and what helps to advance peace. We
call upon Council members not to allow this to occur
and to vote against the United States draft resolution.
For the Council to ultimately be in a position
to deliver on its mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security, a number of

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
4/14 24-07904
non-permanent members of the Security Council
have produced an alternative draft resolution, which
stipulates, in black and white, the demand for both a
ceasefire and the unconditional release of hostages. It
is a balanced and apolitical document. We see no reason
for the Council members not to support it, unless a
ceasefire and the release of hostages are not part of
their plans. This is an attempt to allow the Council
to fulfil the noble functions vested in it, and we call
for members not to let this opportunity slip away.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Ecuador, France, Japan, Malta, Mozambique,
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, China, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Guyana
The President: The draft resolution received 11
votes in favour, 3 against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution was not adopted, owing to the negative vote
of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Today the United States put forward a draft
resolution (S/2024/239) in good faith after consulting
with all Council Members and after multiple rounds of
edits. The vast majority of the Council voted in favour
of the draft resolution, but unfortunately, Russia and
China decided to exercise the veto. And now, Russia
and China will give you all sorts of explanations for
their obstruction. But whether or not they will admit it,
there are two deeply cynical reasons behind their votes.
First, Russia and China still could not bring
themselves to condemn Hamas’s terrorist attacks on
7 October. Can we just pause on that for a moment?
Russia and China refuse to condemn Hamas for
burning people alive, for gunning down innocent
civilians at a concert, for raping women and girls,
for taking hundreds of people hostage. This was the
deadliest single attack on Jews since the Holocaust,
and permanent members of the Council cannot even
condemn it. I am sorry — it is really outrageous, and it
is below the dignity of this organ.
The second reason behind this veto is not just
cynical, it is also petty. Russia and China simply did
not want to vote for a draft resolution that was penned
by the United States, because it would rather see it
fail than see the Council succeed, even after inclusive
consultations over weeks and weeks, even after
negotiations and edits produced a draft that received
overwhelming Council support.
And as Council members saw today, nearly
every Council member voted to put the full weight of
this organ behind the diplomatic efforts to secure an
immediate and sustained ceasefire as part of a deal that
leads to the release of all hostages that will allow much
more humanitarian aid to get into Gaza.
But once again, Russia put politics over progress.
Russia, which has carried out an unprovoked war on
its neighbour, has the audacity and hypocrisy to throw
stones when it lives in a glass house itself.
Let us be honest: for all the fiery rhetoric,
we all know that Russia and China are not doing
anything diplomatically to advance a lasting peace
or to meaningfully contribute to the humanitarian
response effort.
There is obviously another draft resolution that
some Council members would like to be considered.
But, in its current form, that text fails to support
sensitive diplomacy in the region. Worse, it could
actually give Hamas an excuse to walk away from the
deal on the table.
All of us want to see the Council speak out, but
we should not move forward with any draft resolution
that jeopardizes the ongoing negotiations. And those
are not just negotiations that are being carried out by
the United States. Others in the region — Qatar and
Egypt — are engaged on those negotiations. So, if that
alternative draft resolution comes up for a vote and does
not support the diplomacy happening on the ground, we
may once again find the Council deadlocked. I truly
hope that that does not come about.
For our part, the United States will keep at it. We
will continue to work towards a deal alongside Qatar
and Egypt. And we will work with any Council member

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 5/14
that is seriously interested in adopting a resolution that
will help make that deal possible.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom voted yes on the draft resolution
before us this morning (S/2024/239). We voted yes
on the need for an immediate and sustained ceasefire
to protect civilians, allow humanitarian aid in and
alleviate suffering. We voted yes on the call for
international humanitarian law to be upheld, for the
release of hostages, to reject forced displacement and
to urge against a ground offensive into Rafah.
Palestinians are facing a devastating and growing
humanitarian crisis, which will not improve until
more aid can get into Gaza. Therefore, we are deeply
disappointed that Russia and China were unable to
support the Council to clearly and unequivocally state
the need for an immediate and sustained ceasefire to
that end.
Through the draft resolution the Security Council
would have rightly, and for the first time, unequivocally
condemned Hamas’s terrorist attacks. We are
disappointed that the Council was not able to send that
important message owing to the vetoes cast by Russia
and China.
We welcome the patient and constructive
consultation by the United States on this text.
For our part, we will continue to do everything we
can to get aid into Gaza as quickly as possible by land,
sea and air. But an immediate stop in the fighting is the
only way to get the aid into Gaza that is so desperately
needed and make progress towards a permanent,
sustainable ceasefire.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): I address the Security
Council today not only as the representative of Algeria
but also as a representative of the whole Arab world
witnessing the unfolding tragedy in Palestine.
Our region is devastated by the violence inflicted
upon the Palestinian people. Live scenes of destruction
and killing, inflicting profound suffering, are not
bearable anymore.
Since the beginning of the aggression against
the Palestinian people, the Group of Arab States has
consistently called for putting an end to this carnage.
Only by ceasing hostilities can we alleviate the immense
suffering and ensure that large-scale humanitarian
assistance reaches those in need. For that purpose,
last month we presented draft resolution S/2024/173,
which garnered significant support within the Security
Council, but it was ultimately vetoed. We firmly believe
that its adoption could have saved thousands of innocent
lives. There is no doubt that resolutions 2712 (2023)
and 2720 (2023) have fallen short due to the absence
of clear demand for a ceasefire. Those who believe that
the Israeli occupying Power would choose to uphold its
international legal obligations are mistaken. They must
abandon that fiction.
Since the circulation of this draft resolution
(S/2024/239), over a month ago, Algeria has participated
actively and in good faith in the negotiation process,
proposing reasonable edits in order to achieve a more
balanced and acceptable text. We acknowledge the
efforts made by the United States delegation, especially
by Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield, to accommodate
some of our proposals. However, our core concerns
remain unaddressed, despite the many circulated
revised versions.
Throughout the process, we relentlessly
emphasized the urgency of an immediate ceasefire
in order to prevent further loss of life. We echoed the
demand of millions of people and humanitarian actors
for an immediate cessation of hostilities. Regrettably,
the draft resolution falls short of our expectations. It
fails to adequately address those main issues and the
immense suffering endured by the Palestinian people.
Over five months, the conflict in Gaza has
resulted in the tragic loss of life of more than 32,000
Palestinians, with more than 74,000 injuries and 12,000
permanent disabilities. These are not mere statistics.
They represent lives; they represent dreams; they
represent hopes that have been destroyed. Alarmingly,
the text avoids mentioning the responsibility of the
Israeli occupying Power. Those individuals were not
lost due to acts of self-harm. They were killed. Their
perpetrators must be held accountable. For us — in
the Arab world, in the Islamic nations, in the whole
world — Palestinians lives undeniably matter.
The text presented today does not convey a clear
message of peace. It tacitly allows for continuing civilian
casualties and lacks clear safeguards to prevent further
escalation. It is a laissez-passer to continue killing
Palestinian civilians. The emphasis on “measures
to reduce civilian harm from ongoing and future
operations” implies a license for continuing bloodshed.

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
6/14 24-07904
In that context, we are particularly concerned
about a potential military operation in Rafah. Such
an operation would have devastating consequences.
Algeria, along with other countries of the region, has
actively pursued reconciliation between the Palestinian
factions because we trust that a united Palestine is
essential for its future and the future of the peace
process. We believe that specific provisions within the
draft resolution jeopardize the future of the Palestinian
State and hinder ongoing reconciliation efforts.
Building a Palestinian State requires the collective
efforts of all its citizens, and Security Council actions
should support, not impede, that process.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a
vital role in assisting Palestinian refugees — not only
in Palestine, but also in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. It is
a tool of regional stability. Any resolution undermining
UNRWA’s mandate would exacerbate the already
dire humanitarian situation. The Agency’s continuing
operation is essential until Palestinian refugees are able
to sustain themselves or to return home, as stipulated
by international law.
Supporting parallel efforts to end the bloodshed
should not prevent the Council from demanding a
clear ceasefire to alleviate Palestinian suffering. The
Security Council’s duty, under the Charter of the
United Nations, is to maintain international peace and
security. It should be empowered to impose a ceasefire.
For all those reasons, Algeria voted against the draft
resolution. We urge all Council members to prioritize
an immediate cessation of hostilities. The Security
Council must take decisive and meaningful action to
halt the violence and pave the way for a sustainable
peace process in Palestine and the wider region as well.
It is still in our capacity to act, and urgently.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
is grateful to the United States for proposing draft
resolution S/2024/239, for which we voted. The Council
must continue to take action, as the humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza is worsening every day. France
demands the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages and an immediate and lasting ceasefire. We
therefore support the efforts of several elected members
of the Council who are proposing a draft resolution
along those lines, and we welcome the fact that their
draft resolution expresses unreserved support for the
ongoing efforts in Doha, as does France. The draft calls
for comprehensive respect for international law and the
Geneva Conventions. That is an absolute requirement.
France is firmly opposed to any Israeli offensive in
Rafah, which can only lead to a humanitarian disaster.
There is an urgent need for delivering humanitarian
aid to Gaza on a massive scale. The port of Ashdod must
be opened, along with the direct land link from Jordan
and all crossing points. In line with our principles,
France will continue to call the Council to condemn
the terrorist acts and sexual violence committed by
Hamas and other terrorist groups on 7 October 2023.
The vast majority of us supported Brazil’s October
draft resolution (S/2023/773), which clearly condemned
those acts. But while France insists on its tireless
commitment to Israel’s security and its solidarity with
the Israeli people following those attacks, they cannot
justify the suffering to which the Palestinians have been
subjected. France remains committed to a settlement
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and we want to
emphasize that only a two-State solution can ensure
the security needs of Israel and the Palestinian people’s
legitimate aspirations for a State. It is the duty of the
Council to recognize that, and that is why France will
shoulder its responsibilities and propose an initiative to
the Security Council.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea voted in favour of draft resolution S/2024/239,
proposed by the United States, because it includes
positive elements that can plant the seeds for a more
sustainable peace in Palestine and Israel, including
support for the ongoing negotiations to achieve the
release of hostages and an immediate ceasefire. The
Republic of Korea reaffirms its firm position calling for
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire, objecting to any
ground operation in Rafah, and stressing the importance
of the protection of civilians. We note with appreciation
that the draft resolution made it clear that an immediate
and sustained ceasefire is imperative if we are to protect
civilians and alleviate the humanitarian suffering, and
we compliment the United States Government’s efforts
to incorporate comments from Council members.
The draft resolution contains other important
elements, including support for diplomatic efforts
to ensure a ceasefire and the release of all remaining
hostages, the clear condemnation of all acts of
terrorism, including the deplorable Hamas-led attacks
of 7 October 2023, and concern about the proposed
ground offensive into Rafah. It also demands that all
parties enable the full, immediate, safe, sustained and
unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to the

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 7/14
civilian population throughout Gaza. In addition, it
rejects forced displacement and the establishment of
so-called buffer zones and new settlements in Gaza,
and it includes a commitment to a two-State solution.
It is therefore regrettable that another opportunity for
the Council to forge a favourable response has failed to
reach consensus. The Republic of Korea will continue
to engage constructively with other members of the
Council to reach a meaningful outcome in responding
to the grave situation in Gaza.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted against the draft resolution that has just been put
to the vote (S/2024/239). I would like to explain China’s
position and the relevant considerations as follows.
More than 160 days have passed since the outbreak
of the Gaza conflict. In the face of a human tragedy
in which more than 32,000 innocent civilians have
lost their lives and millions are suffering from famine,
the most urgent action that the Council should take
is the promotion of an immediate, unconditional and
sustained ceasefire. That is the universal call expressed
by the international community, the decision taken
by the General Assembly at its emergency special
session a few months ago (see A/ES-10/PV.45), and
the solemn appeal made by the Secretary-General to
the Council while invoking Article 99 of the Charter
(see S/PV.9498). The Council has dragged its feet and
wasted too much time in that regard.
We are all aware that the United States’ introduction
of its own draft resolution has come after its veto on
20 February of the overwhelming consensus among
Council members on an immediate ceasefire (see
S/PV.9552). Over the past month, the draft resolution
has undergone several iterations and contains elements
that respond to the international community’s
concerns, but it has always evaded and dodged the
most central issue, that of a ceasefire. The final text
remains ambiguous and does not call for an immediate
ceasefire. Nor does it even provide an answer to the
question of realizing a ceasefire in the short term.
That is a clear deviation from the Council members’
consensus and falls far short of the expectations of the
international community. An immediate ceasefire is a
fundamental prerequisite for saving lives, expanding
humanitarian access and preventing wider conflicts.
The United States draft resolution, on the contrary, sets
up preconditions for a ceasefire, which is no different
from giving a green light to continued killings, and that
is unacceptable.
Many other aspects of the draft resolution are also
very unbalanced. In particular, with regard to Israel’s
recent and repeated declarations of plans for a military
offensive into Rafah, the draft resolution does not
clearly and unequivocally state its opposition, which
would send an entirely wrong message and lead to
severe consequences.
Any action taken by the Security Council should
stand the test of history and the scrutiny of morality
and conscience. Based on the responsible approach of
standing up for truth and justice and safeguarding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the dignity of the Council, and also based
on the concerns and strong opposition of the Group
of Arab States regarding the draft resolution, China,
together with Algeria and Russia, has voted against the
draft resolution.
The members of the Security Council have now
been presented with another draft resolution, the result
of collective consultations among the elected members
of the Council. This draft resolution is clear on the issue
of a ceasefire. It is in line with the correct direction
for the Council’s action and is extremely relevant, and
China supports it. We hope that Council members will
reach agreement on that basis as soon as possible and
send a clear signal calling for an immediate ceasefire
and an end to the fighting.
Like other members, China has from the outset
called for the immediate release of all hostages, a
demand that has been reiterated in resolutions 2712
(2023) and 2720 (2023). We welcome the mediation
efforts by Egypt, Qatar and others to that end, and we
hope that all the detainees will be released as soon
as possible.
China rejects the United States and United
Kingdom’s groundless accusations about China’s
voting position. If the United States was serious about
a ceasefire, it would not have vetoed multiple Council
draft resolutions again and again, and it would not have
taken this detour and played a game of words while
being ambiguous and evasive on critical issues. If the
United States is serious about a ceasefire, we beg it
to vote in favour of the other draft resolution’s clear
call for one, so that such a ceasefire can finally and
immediately be achieved, the Palestinians’ sufferings
alleviated and ended and the hostages released without
delay. At this stage, what is most important for the
United States is not words but actions.

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
8/14 24-07904
No matter what, China will continue to work with
Council members and the international community
to play a responsible and constructive role in order
to achieve a ceasefire and put an end to the fighting,
alleviate the catastrophic suffering, implement a two-
State solution and promote a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta thanks the United
States for its efforts and consistent engagement on
today’s draft resolution (S/2024/239). Malta voted in
favour of the text, and we regret that the use of the veto
has prevented its adoption. We believe it would have
represented another important step in the right direction
and would have continued to build on resolutions
2712 (2023) and 2720 (2023). Malta remains firm in
its position that an immediate and permanent ceasefire
is the only avenue by which we can prevent a further
deterioration in the situation and begin addressing the
impact of the Israeli-Hamas war.
We support and appreciate the ongoing efforts
by Egypt, Qatar and the United States to negotiate a
deal that will enable hostages to be released. We will
continue to reiterate our call on Hamas to release all of
its hostages safely and unconditionally. We welcome the
fact that the draft condemns the heinous Hamas terror
attacks of 7 October, including the taking of hostages
and the sexual violence committed. We recognize
that the text emphasizes the concerns about a possible
ground offensive into Rafah and the catastrophic
consequences that such an offensive would have for
1.5 million people, the majority of whom are women
and children. However, we underline that the Council
cannot be perceived to be authorizing any ongoing or
future Israeli military operations into Rafah in any way.
We stress our firm rejection of any ground offensive
into Rafah and believe that the draft should have had
stronger and more reassuring language on the matter.
We also underline the fact that a forced displacement of
the Palestinian civilian population from or within Gaza
would amount to a grave breach of international law.
Malta continues to be seriously alarmed at the ever-
increasing humanitarian toll of this war, which has
persisted during this holy month of Ramadan. We firmly
reiterate our call to Israel to ensure the immediate, safe,
sustained and unhindered delivery of adequate aid to
the people in Gaza, which is so desperately needed.
We must do our utmost to alleviate the suffering of
civilians there, and we also repeat our call for the
full implementation of resolutions 2712 (2023) and
2720 (2023). Malta remains deeply concerned about
the ongoing situation in the region. We reiterate that an
immediate and permanent ceasefire remains a priority
if we are to de-escalate this deeply worrying spiral
of violence and regional escalation. In closing, Malta
reaffirms its steadfast commitment to achieving a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. That demands
a two-State solution whereby Israel and Palestine, as
two democratic States, peacefully coexist side by
side within secure and recognized borders, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
internationally agreed parameters.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): After five
months of war in Gaza and the horrific attacks of
7 October 2023, the Council has still not been able to
adopt a text that addresses all the dimensions of the
conflict in a manner that has an impact on the situation
on the ground and upholds the rule of law. While Guyana
welcomed the United States’ initiative to develop a
draft resolution and the transparency with which the
negotiations were conducted, we are of the view that
given the length of time spent on those negotiations and
the consistent expression of certain positions by several
delegations, the draft resolution (S/2024/239) could
have better reflected the broad-based feedback. Guyana
abstained in the voting today on the draft resolution for
a number of reasons, which I will elaborate on.
First, contrary to some media and other reports,
it does not call for an immediate ceasefire. Instead,
we note that it “determines the imperative” for a
ceasefire and calls for support for diplomatic efforts
that are ongoing outside the United Nations. While
those efforts must be commended, given the Council’s
responsibility and mandate Guyana could not support
a draft resolution that does not call unequivocally
for an immediate ceasefire. Nearly 32,000 people,
the majority of them women and children, have been
killed in Gaza since 7 October. More than 74,000 have
been maimed. Initial United Nations assessments have
concluded that it will take years to clear the 23 million
tons of rubble and unexploded weapons scattered
across Gaza. The latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification report projects famine between now and
May. In summary, this human-made disaster cannot
be halted without an immediate ceasefire, and it is the
Council’s responsibility to demand one unequivocally,
even while acknowledging the efforts of Qatar, Egypt
and the United States.

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 9/14
Secondly, the demand for a ceasefire should
not be linked to or conditional on the release of
hostages. The taking of hostages is strictly prohibited
under international law, and their release must be
unconditional. Guyana reiterates its call for the
immediate and unconditional release of all hostages.
Two wrongs cannot make a right, and the Palestinian
people should not be collectively punished and
themselves held hostage for the crimes of others.
Thirdly, in our view, the draft text today lacked
attribution in a number of key areas. While it includes
a condemnation of Hamas for the 7 October attacks
and demands that they immediately grant humanitarian
access to the hostages — and rightly so — it provides
no attribution to the Israeli authorities regarding what
is taking place in Gaza or demands on them. For
example, who is responsible for the fact that 1.5 million
Palestinians have taken refuge in Rafah, and who has
announced a planned military ground offensive there?
To whom is the demand for compliance with obligations
under international law regarding the protection of
civilians and civilian objects, humanitarian access
and the protection of humanitarian relief and medical
personnel, their assets and infrastructure applicable?
Who has erected and maintained the existing barriers
to the provision of humanitarian assistance at scale?
Who is responsible for the forcible displacement of
the civilian population in Gaza? Who is preventing the
use of all available routes to and throughout the entire
Gaza Strip? Who does not respect deconfliction and
notification mechanisms?
We know the answers to those questions. We have
heard briefer after briefer, both from the United Nations
system and civil society, describe the situation on the
ground, explaining where the problems are and who
is responsible for creating them. Why, then, were the
relevant demands in the draft resolution not clearly
addressed to the occupying Power? Not even once was
that done. Indeed, if one were to read this draft resolution
without background knowledge, it would be difficult to
ascertain which party in this conflict is committing the
atrocities in Gaza — atrocities that necessitated this
draft resolution being put forward. In a draft resolution
of 41 paragraphs, 2,036 words, the occupying Power is
mentioned once, in the penultimate paragraph.
Fourthly, preambular paragraph 7 was of particular
concern to Guyana. The Council is the organ with
the Charter responsibility for addressing threats to
peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
How can we endorse the idea of “ongoing and future
operations” in Gaza as long as measures are taken to
“reduce significantly civilian harm”. That idea was
rejected by several delegations during the course
of the negotiations. In Guyana’s view, it is in direct
contravention of the Council’s responsibility. It would
set a dangerous precedent and make the Council
complicit in the atrocities being committed in Gaza
now and in the future.
Fifthly and finally, we took note of the four
paragraphs dealing with the mandate of the Senior
Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator for
Gaza. While we applaud the Coordinator’s efforts, we
are of the view that the scale of efforts that would be
required in Gaza after the war would warrant a key role
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), given
its decades of experience in the Strip and its capacity
vis-à-vis other agencies operating there. The Council has
heard many times of the indispensability of UNRWA.
It is the lifeline for Palestinians. We were therefore
disappointed that the only mention of UNRWA in the
draft resolution pertained to the investigations into the
allegations against a small number of its staff. Guyana,
supported by several delegations, had requested an
affirmation of UNRWA’s important mandate in the
text, but that was not taken on board.
The Council still has an opportunity to take action
to end the suffering of all parties. Civilians in Gaza
need a respite. Palestinians need a respite. Israelis
need a respite. Both need a respite from the continuous
cycle of violence and pain. That is the real window
of opportunity — the strong desire of the people of
Palestine and Israel for peace. Guyana is prepared to
work with other Council members to respond to their
needs and legitimate aspirations, including, very
importantly, the two-State solution. That must not
be postponed.
Mr. Žbogar (Slovenia): A month after our previous
vote (see S/PV.9552), I will repeat my words: we voted
in favour of the draft resolution (S/2024/239) because
the killing and starving of civilians in Gaza must stop,
and the suffering of hostages and their families must
end. We voted in favour of the draft resolution because
we believe it is imperative for the Security Council
to send a clear message that the situation in Gaza
is unacceptable.

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
10/14 24-07904
We deeply regret the use of the veto by the Russian
Federation and China. We thank the United States for
its efforts on this draft resolution. The draft resolution
offered the Council an opportunity to follow up on
several harrowing briefings that we have received in
the past month. The draft resolution did not include all
the elements that we would have wanted to see in the
text. However, it provided us an opportunity to express
ourselves on a number of particularly concerning aspects
of the crisis in Gaza, and they include: the importance of
achieving an immediate and sustained ceasefire; the need
to release hostages; a clear stance against an offensive
in Rafah and its serious implications for regional peace
and security; the urgency of removing roadblocks to
humanitarian assistance, including the need for the
increased provision and distribution of humanitarian
aid; the need for the respect of international law and
the protection of civilians and civilian objects; the need
for the protection of humanitarian relief and medical
personnel; the rejection of an attempt at a territorial
or demographic change of Gaza, including forced
displacement; and the commitment of the Council to the
vision of the two-State solution.
Many of those elements have been extensively
elaborated during numerous meetings and briefings on
Gaza. As emphasized on those occasions, we believe in
the complementarity of all efforts — bilateral, regional
and those of the Council. We therefore once again thank
the leaders of Egypt, Qatar and the United States for their
efforts in securing a deal on the ground. Slovenia is of
the view that a strong signal of support from the Council
for the negotiations on the ground could give the process
important impetus and bring us closer to lasting peace.
We continue to condemn Hamas’s terrorist attack
of 7 October 2023 and call for the immediate and
unconditional release of the hostages. Hamas did set
this in motion, but it did not have to end with more than
32,000 Palestinians killed, the rest of them starving and
massive violations of international humanitarian law.
War, with all its tragic consequences, is a choice, not
a necessity.
We underscore the need for accountability and
adherence to international law, and we would like to once
again express our deep concern about the statements of
Israeli officials regarding resettlement of the people of
Gaza and reject the possible ground invasion in Rafah.
We regret that the Council has once again been
unable to send a clear signal of the need for this conflict
to end in order to then continue its work on the political
solution and the vision of the two-State solution. We
reiterate our call for full respect for international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, the provisional measures of the International
Court of Justice and resolutions 2712 (2023) and 2720
(2023). The Council must demonstrate leadership in the
pursuit of peace. Slovenia will continue its engagement
with all Council members to find a united voice from the
Council. For Slovenia, Palestinian lives matter. For us,
Israeli lives matter. This conflict must end.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland voted in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America (S/2024/239)
and regrets that it was not adopted owing to the veto of
two permanent members of the Security Council.
In the light of the unbearable suffering on the ground,
the Council should have achieved a tangible result and
sent a signal of its capacity for action and clear unity
in support of the protection of civilians. All Council
members contributed to the many consultations on the
text put to the vote today, and I thank the United States
for its efforts. However, right up to the end, Switzerland
argued for its content to be brought closer to the clear
and concrete request made repeatedly by a very large
majority of Council members for the implementation
of an immediate humanitarian ceasefire without any
preconditions. It is high time that an unequivocal request
for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire be agreed by
consensus within the Council.
In view of the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
which civilians — primarily children — find themselves
in Gaza, the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons
at the mercy of the bombardments, and the risk of famine
and epidemics, such a ceasefire remains an extremely
urgent priority step. Humanitarian aid, which the entire
population of Gaza needs today, must be provided quickly,
safely and without hindrance. We note that the United
States text does not explicitly call for the immediate
and unconditional release of the hostages — a demand
that a large majority of Council members, including
Switzerland, have consistently made since the acts of
terror perpetrated by Hamas on 7 October. Switzerland
welcomes, on the other hand, the condemnation of those
acts in the text.
Finally, Switzerland remains deeply concerned about
the humanitarian consequences of the current hostilities.
A large-scale military offensive in Rafah would

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 11/14
significantly worsen the already catastrophic situation of
the civilian population and create a new major obstacle to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Such a prospect
is unacceptable and cannot be endorsed by the Council.
Today’s failure should under no circumstances
be interpreted as a message for the parties to continue
the hostilities. For that reason, Switzerland will remain
committed, including with the elected members of
the Security Council, to facilitating rapid action by
the Council. We encourage all the negotiation efforts
undertaken by the United States, Egypt and Qatar and
thank them for those efforts.
It also remains our duty to ensure that the obligations
under international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law, be respected by
all parties under all circumstances, even in the absence
of Council resolutions, in order to protect and assist
civilian populations.
Switzerland will remain committed to unified
action aimed at bringing the conflict to an end and
re-establishing a political horizon, in line with our
mandate to maintain peace and security.
Mr. Sowa (Sierra Leone): Today the Security
Council considered the draft resolution presented by
the United States (S/2024/239) as part of the Council’s
efforts to fulfil its responsibility to honour the Charter of
the United Nations and to maintain international peace
and security.
We acknowledge the time and effort dedicated by
United States to ensure that we had a draft resolution
that could address the current situation on the ground as
it relates to the ongoing hostilities in the Gaza Strip since
the attack of 7 October.
Despite the serious difficulties we have with some
provisions of the text, Sierra Leone voted in favour of the
draft resolution to demonstrate commitment to achieving
a sustainable cessation of hostilities, even if incremental
in approach and dependent on diplomatic negotiations
outside of the United Nations.
The text placed before the Council by the penholder
did not call for an unambiguous, immediate ceasefire
and an unconditional release of the hostages. With
the unfolding catastrophe, tragic and massive scale of
killings and human suffering in Gaza, Sierra Leone has
committed to supporting initiatives that will lead to a
ceasefire. Our vote therefore was informed by the need
to support actions that could lead to an immediate and
sustained ceasefire, alleviate human suffering, stop
forced displacement of Palestinians and allow for the
delivery of essential humanitarian assistance, including
medical supplies, water, food, bedding and shelter. Our
vote is also indicative of the urgent need for all hostages
held by Hamas to be immediately released.
With our vote we underscore the urgent need for
expanded and unimpeded humanitarian assistance
to civilians in the entire Gaza Strip, especially at this
critical moment of acute food insecurity in the Gaza
Strip and imminent risk of famine.
As a firm proponent of consistency in complying
with international law, Sierra Leone welcomes the call
for parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law, with regard to the conduct of hostilities
and the protection of civilians and civilian objects.
While we regret that the current text was not adopted
owing to the incorporation of elements that could be
misinterpreted and which lacks the Council’s consensus,
that setback notwithstanding, as a Council, we must
continue our pursuit of peace.
Our quest for a solution to the ongoing catastrophic
humanitarian situation is to rescue the 17,000
unaccompanied children in the Gaza Strip, more than
1.4 million internally displaced persons, the wounded,
women and other vulnerable groups from untimely
deaths and untold suffering.
Sierra Leone will continue to recognize the key
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and all United
Nations humanitarian agencies in providing life-saving
assistance to the civilian population and offer its
support to the Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction
Coordinator for Gaza.
When the guns are silent and we are at the critical
point, it is our firm view that the people of Palestine
should be given the liberty to determine their political
status and future. We emphasize that all engagements
regarding reconstruction of the Gaza Strip must be
conducted in good faith and with the active participation
of the Palestinians.
Mr. De La Gasca (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador voted in favour of the draft resolution that we
have just considered (S/2024/239) because we share the
sense of urgency for the Council to act in the face of the
catastrophic humanitarian situation of the Palestinian

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
12/14 24-07904
civilians in Gaza on the brink of famine and with the
risk of the spread of violence to other locations, which
could also have catastrophic consequences.
We voted in favour of a draft resolution that is the
result of a lengthy negotiation process in which all
members of the Council participated. It is above all a
draft resolution that contains not only the Council’s
determination that an immediate ceasefire is required,
but also other elements of considerable importance,
relevance and urgency, including in the medium and
long term, with a view to achieving a lasting peace. The
text also includes an explicit condemnation of the Hamas
terrorist attacks and the taking of hostages. Ecuador
reiterates the demand that the hostages be released
immediately unconditionally.
I am convinced that each of us, each member of the
Council, believes that the text could be improved upon.
But I am also fully convinced that we would never agree
on which part needs to be improved upon or how to do it.
In such a complex situation, a perfect text for everyone
is impossible.
The Council must not be hostage to political rivalries.
It should be a space for building reconciliation and peace,
in the framework of a mandate clearly established in the
Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, I once again
regret that a majority decision of the Council has not
been respected owing to the use of the veto.
The President: I shall make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Over five months have passed since Hamas’s
horrifying acts of terror took place in Israel, which
has led to the unfolding of the tragedies the world has
been witnessing in Gaza. At least 32,000 Palestinians
have been reported to be killed by Israel in Gaza, most
of them women and children. The population is on
the brink of famine, and the looming Israeli military
offensive into Rafah only threatens to deepen the
humanitarian catastrophe. That should not proceed
under any circumstances.
Given the gravity of the situation on the ground,
Japan voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2024/239).
We deeply regret that it failed to be adopted.
Japan appreciates the tireless efforts of the United
States in consulting with all Council members throughout
the negotiation process.
Had it been adopted, the draft resolution could have
pushed forward ongoing, vigorous diplomatic efforts, in
particular the four-party talks, towards an immediate
and sustained ceasefire and the release of hostages.
We believe that this would be a pragmatic approach to
improve the humanitarian situation on the ground.
Although we were unable to adopt the draft
resolution, the Council must put pressure on the parties
to conclude a deal as soon as possible. Those in Gaza and
beyond cannot wait another day.
I resume my functions as President of Council.
The Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We just now listened to hypocritical statements
from a number of members of the Council, shedding
crocodile tears over the Russian and Chinese vetoes. We
explained the reasons why we did not allow the adoption
of draft resolution S/2024/239. By no means is it because
it was put forward by the United States delegation, as
its representative asserted today. I told all of those who
voted here today that they would be covering themselves
with disgrace if they voted for the American text, which
was unacceptable for everyone, including those who are
now praising it.
Shall I tell the Council what really happened?
It is not difficult to see, as the scenario is not at all
complicated. The American overlords, in addition to
twisting the arms of their leaders in the capitals, told
them not to worry because the Russian Federation would
veto the draft resolution anyway, but that they should
not go against the American text. That is it; that is the
whole scenario. There is no need for them, here and now,
to hypocritically tell us how disappointed they are that
Russia and China vetoed the draft resolution. I say again
that today they have covered themselves with disgrace
by voting in favour of a text that they themselves did not
and do not actually support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I would like to begin by
expressing my gratitude to the United States of America.
The United Nations was established in the wake of the
Holocaust to prevent such atrocities from happening
again. I thank Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield for
defending those values. Her determination to condemn

22/03/2024 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question S/PV.9584
24-07904 13/14
the Hamas monsters and her conviction that the release
of the hostages is not something that can be postponed,
shows true moral clarity. The American draft resolution
(S/2024/239), had it been adopted, would have marked
a moment of morality for the United Nations — a place
where good is evil and justice is injustice. It would
have been the very first time that the Council or any
United Nations entity, condemned Hamas and its brutal
massacre. Yet sadly, for purely political reasons, the
draft resolution did not pass, and terrorists can continue
benefiting from the Council whitewashing their crimes.
How can we explain to children around the world
that the organ mandated to uphold global peace and
security refuses to condemn terrorists for the most
horrific crimes? The Council’s decision to not condemn
Hamas is a stain that will never be forgotten.
As Israel defends its very future against those that
seek our annihilation, all United Nations entities have
dedicated their discussions only to the situation in Gaza
and the civilian casualties. Numbers supplied by the
terrorists are thrown around and quoted as if they were
the word of God. Yet, in essence, those numbers are
merely the lies of Hamas, which the United Nations is so
quick to parrot.
The time has come to put an end to that myth. Hamas
knows that it cannot defeat Israel militarily. Its goal is
to annihilate Israel, and its strategy is to terrorize our
civilians while weaponizing the international community
to tie our hands in order to ensure their survival. And
how do they do it? They use Gazans as human shields in
an effort to maximize civilian casualties, knowing that
it will lead the Council to pressure Israel into ending
the military operation. Please remember that for Israel,
every civilian death is a tragedy. For Hamas, civilian
deaths are a strategy. And sadly, the Council is playing
into Hamas’s strategy — exactly as it predicted.
Israel is a law-abiding democracy. We take every
effort to minimize collateral damage. Israel has gone
above and beyond to ensure the safety of civilians. We
drop warning leaflets, make tens of thousands of phone
calls and provide Gazans with military maps detailing
safe corridors. Israel has taken steps that no other
military in any other conflict has ever taken — all in
order to mitigate civilian casualties. Hamas, on the other
hand, for years built hundreds of miles of terror tunnels,
in which terrorists hide and our hostages are held. Why
did Hamas do it? Hamas does this precisely in order to
exploit Gazan civilians as human shields and to increase
the death toll.
For Hamas, more murdered civilians is key to their
survival. It is their path towards a ceasefire that will keep
them in power. Everyone should ask themselves whether
they are helping advance Hamas’s strategy. Through the
Gaza Ministry of Health that it controls, Hamas provides
false statistics, which are then parroted around the globe
promoting the lies of terrorists. By merely looking at
the Hamas numbers, it is crystal clear that they cannot
represent reality. A statistics professor from Wharton
School of Business, recently released an analysis of the
Gaza Ministry of Health data, with numbers, proving
that the figures are not only distorted, but also inflated.
They have no possible basis in reality.
But even if we were to take Hamas’s falsified
numbers at face value, the non-combatant to combatant
ratio in Gaza is roughly one to one. That is the lowest
ratio in the history of urban warfare. Every civilian
death in Gaza, as I said, is tragic, but the only party
to blame is Hamas. Yet the Security Council refused
to hold Hamas accountable for deliberately putting
Gazans in the line of fire. Condemn the tunnel under
schools, condemn the exploitation of hospitals for
terror, hold Hamas accountable. The same can be said
about the libellous narrative of famine in Gaza. That
too is Hamas propaganda, which the United Nations has
chosen to embrace. Israel places absolutely no limit on
humanitarian aid entering Gaza. To date, 341,000 tons
of aid — on more than 18,283 trucks — have entered the
Gaza Strip. Any country that wishes to provide more aid
is more than welcome to do so, and we will facilitate its
entry. The only reason why any Gazan lacks aid is because
Hamas loots it and steals much of it. As long as Hamas
is in control, Gaza’s economic situation will be in ruins.
The Council has expressed its concern over an
operation in Rafah, but let me be clear — no country
seeks to avoid an operation in Rafah more than Israel.
Whose sons and daughters are being sent into battle? It
is our children who are making the ultimate sacrifice in
defence of their homeland. From the outset of the war,
Israel’s goal have been clear — return the hostages,
dismantle Hamas’s terror capabilities and ensure that
Gaza no longer poses a threat to Israel.
So far, Israel has succeeded in dismantling roughly
18 Hamas battalions, but there are four remaining
battalions in Rafah, with around 8,000 terrorists. Israel
is fighting for its future, and if we fail to achieve our

S/PV.9584 The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question 22/03/2024
14/14 24-07904
goals, Hamas will repeat 7 October again and again — as
it promised publicly. That applies not only to Hamas, by
the way — terror will prevail in our region, which will
inspire jihadi organizations all across the globe.
The only way to achieve a real and permanent
ceasefire is to eliminate Hamas capabilities entirely.
And that cannot happen unless all of their battalions are
demolished. One cannot extinguish a fire by putting out
most of it. The fire will grow again and spread. That is
what will happen without an operation in Rafah. Israel
sees no alternative. The road to a permanent ceasefire
passes through Rafah. If the Council has any other ideas
how to dismantle the terror group without entering
Rafah, we would love to hear them. We are open.
Once Hamas’s key capabilities are dismantled,
Israel’s goal of demilitarizing Gaza can materialize. But
for a lasting solution between Israel and Gaza, there is
another requirement — deradicalization. According to
a recent poll by the Palestinian Centre for Policy and
Survey — the Palestinian Centre’s research — 71 per
cent, I repeat, 71 per cent of Palestinians support Hamas’s
7 October massacre. It is not just a minister saying this or
that, as has been said here. The fact is that 71 per cent of the
Palestinian people support the massacre and more than
60 per cent of Palestinians want to see Hamas in control
of the Gaza Strip. Can the Council comprehend that? The
vast majority of Palestinians support Hamas’s massacre
and want to keep these rapists and murderers in power.
That is the root of the problem. Anyone who ignores
that deep-seated hatred and makes demands of Israel,
and only Israel, is burying their head in the sand like an
ostrich, just as the United Nations has done since Israel
disengaged and withdrew from Gaza in 2005. For 18 years
the United Nations has turned a blind eye to Hamas’s
bigotry, incitement and radical indoctrination to terror,
which are rampant in schools across Gaza, including
schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We hear
calls for two States and for peace, yet the United Nations
refuses to address the underlying issue. The vast majority
of Palestinians are not looking for peace. What is most
important to them is Israel’s annihilation at any cost. That
is why deradicalization is key. When one-sided demands
are made on Israel without any demands on Palestinians
to end their culture of hate and incitement, a long-term
solution will never be possible. The Council should
demand that the Palestinian Authority combat terror,
end incitement, stop paying salaries to terrorists and
deradicalize the people. The educational transformation
that the German people underwent after the Third Reich
was toppled is what the Palestinians need to receive so
that they can finally support coexistence — coexistence
with Jews, coexistence with Israel. That is how we
educate our children.
The war may be in Gaza, but it extends much
further than our battle against Hamas. As every Council
member is well aware, the true puppet master directing
Hamas, Hizbullah and the Houthis — all of them — to
attack us and their militias is Iran. Iran is the architect of
instability and its ambitions for world domination must
be stopped. The ayatollah regime is determined to wipe
Israel off the map and is not ashamed to say it publicly.
Tomorrow the Jewish people will celebrate the
holiday of Purim, which represents a very important
message to the murderous ayatollah regime and the rest
of the world. Around 1,500 years ago in Persia, which
is modern-day Iran, the king signed a disastrous decree
calling for the annihilation of all the Jews in his empire.
Following that catastrophic decision, the Jewish people
banded together, and through conviction and faith
succeeded in reversing that resolution, gaining the right
to self-defence. As a result, they defeated all who set out
to murder them, and the man behind the evil plot was
executed. That is the story of Purim, our holiday, and
the holiday’s watchword is “and the opposite happened”.
The people who plotted against the Jews saw their own
schemes turned against them. That is the essence of
Jewish history. We have carried the very same faith and
conviction that the Jews of Persia displayed with us to this
day. That is why we have survived and thrived despite
all of the decrees and racist decisions taken against us
throughout history. Many have tried to destroy us, but all
have failed, because we will never surrender and we will
always fight for our existence.
The members of the Council called for a cease-
fire in honour of the Muslim holiday of Ramadan. We
respect Ramadan, but Hamas’s massacre was carried
out on the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah, the holi-
day on which we mark the completion of the reading
of the Old Testament, the Torah. So today, in honour
of Purim, the request of the Jewish people is that the
Council take real and active measures to release all
of our hostages, and if we are successful, if the hos-
tages return home and Hamas is dismantled, then
just as it says in the Megillah, the text that we read
on Purim, “The Jewish people had light and joy, glad-
ness, happiness and honour for us and all humankind”.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.
