(1)
the following entries are added to the list of natural and legal persons, entities and bodies under heading ‘A. Natural persons’:
Names (Transliteration into Latin script)
Names
Identifying information
Reasons for listing
Date of listing
‘110.
Moshe SHARVIT
משה שרביט
(Hebrew spelling)
DOB: 13.11.1994
Nationality: Israeli
Gender: male
ID number: 206223000
Address: Tirzah Valley Farm outpost, West Bank, Occupied Palestinian Territories
Associated entities: Moshe’s Farm
Moshe Sharvit is an Israeli settler in the Jordan Valley who lives in an outpost near a village, called “Tirza Valley Farm” and also known as “Moshe’s Farm”.
Moshe Sharvit is engaged in settler violence and threats towards Palestinian residents in shepherding communities close to his hilltop outpost in the West Bank. His harassment against those communities has escalated since October 2023.
Moshe Sharvit has frequently harassed Palestinians verbally and physically, demanding that they leave their homes and properties. In October 2023, that behaviour resulted in Palestinian civilians fleeing their village of Ein Shibli. He used threatening language against Palestinian men, women and children and physically attacked an elderly person. His actions include hurling stones at Palestinians and their livestock, intentionally driving into herds and cultivated fields, deploying dogs to attack Palestinians and their livestock, and physically abusing animals by using clubs and whips.
Therefore, Moshe Sharvit is responsible for serious and systematic human rights abuses, including abuse of the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental integrity. Those abuses are also of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
15.7.2024
111.
Zvi BAR YOSEF
a.k.a. Zvi BAR-YOSEF
DOB: 20.9.1992
Nationality: Israeli
Gender: male
ID number: 204377998
Associated entities: Zvi’s Farm
Zvi Bar Yosef established the unauthorised outpost known as “Zvi’s Farm” in the West Bank, east of the Halamish settlement. The outpost has taken over some 2,500 dunams / 620 acres that were cultivated by the villages of Jibya, Kaubar (Kobar) and Umm Safa.
In 2019, 2021 and 2023, Zvi Bar Yosef repeatedly attacked and committed acts of violence against Palestinians from those villages, causing severe injuries to some of them.
Therefore, Zvi Bar Yosef is responsible for serious and systematic human rights abuses, including abuses of the right to physical and mental integrity, the right to property and the right to private and family life. Those abuses are also of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
15.7.2024
112.
Isaschar MANNE
a.k.a. Issachar MANN
יששכר מן
(Hebrew spelling)
DOB: 10.5.1983
Nationality: Israeli
Gender: male
ID number: 038826939
Isaschar Manne, who established the unauthorised Manne Farm outpost in the South Hebron Hills, has repeatedly invaded private lands of the residents of the village of Ta’ala and prevented Palestinians from moving about freely, for instance by preventing Palestinian children from reaching their school in Tuba, Masafer Yatta.
Since 2018, there have been several accounts of Isaschar Manne barging into shepherds’ homes, and threatening and harassing them. Manne, who is often armed, has prevented Palestinian shepherds from accessing their pastures, thus depriving them of the possibility to cultivate their land and provide for their needs.
Therefore, Isaschar Manne is responsible for systematic and serious human rights abuses, including abuses of the right to property, the right to private and family life and the right to education. Those abuses are also of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
15.7.2024
113.
Baruch MARZEL
Position(s): Member of Otzma Yehudit
DOB: 23.4.1959
POB: Boston, USA
Nationality: American, Israeli
Gender: male
Address: Tel Rumeida settlement, Hebron, Occupied Palestinian Territories
Baruch Marzel is a member of the far-right political party “Otzma Yehudit”, which represents one of Israel’s most extremist ideologies and is part of the Kahanist movement. In the 1990s, he was the leader of the Kahane party until it was banned by the Israeli authorities in 1994.
In 2019, Baruch Marzel was banned by the Israeli Supreme Court from standing in parliamentary elections because the court found that he had made numerous racist remarks.
Baruch Marzel calls for the creation of a Greater Israel where Palestinians would have no place. He openly calls for an ethnic cleansing of the Palestinians and denies the Palestinians’ right to their own land.
Therefore, Baruch Marzel is responsible for serious human rights abuses, in particular systematic advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred, which constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence. Those abuses are also of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
15.7.2024
114.
Ben-Zion “Bentzi” GOPSTEIN
בן ציון גופשטיין
(Hebrew spelling)
Position: founder and leader of Lehava
DOB: 10.9.1969
Nationality: Israeli
Gender: male
ID number: 024526394
Address: Givat HaAvot, Kiryat Arba, Occupied Palestinian Territories
Associated entities: Lehava
Ben-Zion “Bentzi” Gopstein, who lives in the settlement of Kiryat Arba (West Bank), is the founder and leader of the extremist organisation “Lehava”, a spin-off from the Kahanist movement, with the goal to “fight assimilation in the Holy Land”.
Ben-Zion “Bentzi” Gopstein promotes a vision that denies all Palestinians their rights and calls for an end to the Palestinian presence in Israel and in the Palestinian Territories.
Ben-Zion “Bentzi” Gopstein openly called for a war against the Palestinians. He was banned by Israel’s Supreme Court from running in the 2019 Knesset elections because he “systematically incites racism against the Arab public”.
Therefore, Ben-Zion “Bentzi” Gopstein is responsible for systematic and serious human rights abuses consisting of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred, which constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence. Those abuses are also of serious concern as regards the objectives of the common foreign and security policy as set out in Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union.
15.7.2024’
