Go to main content
Text size
To change text size, press Ctrl (Cmd on a Mac) and press + to increase or - to decrease.
English
Vis denne siden på norsk
Siidu ii gávdno sámegillii
Sámegiel álgosiidui
Government.no
Menu Search
Search
Selected links
Search
Topics
Topics
Business and industry
Climate and environment
Consumers
Culture, sports and non-profit work
Defence
Education
Elections and democracy
Energy
Equality and diversity
European policy
Families and children
Food, fisheries and agriculture
Foreign affairs
Health and care
Immigration and integration
Indigenous peoples and minorities
Labour
Law and order
Pensions and welfare
Public administration
Research
Svalbard and the Polar Areas
The economy
The High North
Ocean
Transport and communications
Ukraine
Close menu
Documents
Find document
The National Budget 2025
The Revised National Budget 2025
Consultations
Draft resolutions and bills
White papers
Official Norwegian Reports (NOUs)
Guidelines and brochures
Reports, plans and strategies
Letters
Acts and regulations
Circulars
Close menu
What's new
What's new
News and press releases
Speeches and statements
Calendar
Press contacts
Close menu
Historical archive
Ministries
Ministries
Office of the Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre (Labour Party)
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Nils Kristen Sandtrøen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Children and Families Lene Vågslid (Labour Party)
Ministry of Climate and Environment Andreas Bjelland Eriksen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Culture and Equality Lubna Jaffery (Labour Party)
Ministry of Defence Tore O. Sandvik (Labour Party)
Ministry of Digitalisation and Public Governance Karianne Oldernes Tung (Labour Party)
Ministry of Education and Research Kari Nessa Nordtun (Labour Party) Sigrun Aasland (Labour Party)
Ministry of Energy Terje Aasland (Labour Party)
Ministry of Finance Jens Stoltenberg (Labour Party)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Espen Barth Eide (Labour Party) Åsmund Grøver Aukrust (Labour Party)
Ministry of Health and Care Services Jan Christian Vestre (Labour Party)
Ministry of Justice and Public Security Astri Aas-Hansen (Labour Party)
Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion Tonje Brenna (Labour Party)
Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development Kjersti Stenseng (Labour Party)
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries Cecilie Myrseth (Labour Party) Marianne Sivertsen Næss (Labour Party)
Ministry of Transport Jon-Ivar Nygård (Labour Party)
Close menu
The Government
The Government
Støre’s Government
Members of the Government
Find news
How is Norway governed?
Change of Government in Norway
How is Norway governed?
Norway's Governments since 1814
Norway's Governments 1814 -
Statistics
Close menu
Historical archive
You are here:
Home
What's new
What's new
Press contacts
Webcast
News and press releases
Speeches and statements
Calendar
News
Statement by Foreign Minister Eide on the situation in Palestine
News
Share/Send
Share/Send
Facebook
X/Twitter
LinkedIn
Epost
Close
Print
Statement by Foreign Minister Eide on the situation in Palestine
News story | Date: 11/03/2025 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Les på norsk
‘The situation in Palestine has been in a critical phase since the first period of the ceasefire agreement for Gaza expired a week ago’, says Espen Barth Eide, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
‘The most important priority now is to ensure that the ceasefire continues, leading to a permanent cessation of hostilities, the release of the hostages, military withdrawal, and the opportunity to start the reconstruction of Gaza’.
‘Israel’s blocking of humanitarian aid and the suspension of electricity supply to Gaza is unacceptable and violates Israel’s obligations under international law. Cutting electricity severely impacts the Palestinian population in Gaza. It impedes desalination plants from producing clean water. Electricity is also essential for food production and the operation of hospitals’.
‘It is positive that the United States, together with Egypt and Qatar, is heavily engaged in efforts to secure the continuation of the ceasefire. This work must continue in full force. Hostages must be released and reunited with their families as soon as possible. The releases must be carried out in a more dignified manner than we have seen previously’.
‘Military withdrawal must take place in accordance with previous understandings. The war must end so that the reconstruction of Gaza can begin. Norway supports the Arab reconstruction plan. The Palestinian people has the right to govern themselves and live safely in their own country’.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Topic
Human rights
Humanitarian efforts
Related
News and press releases about the crisis in the The Middle East
Go to the top
Government.no
About this website
News Alert
Right of use and copyright for photos and video material
Manage cookies
Responsible for the ministry's webpages:
Responsible editor: Head of Communications Tuva Bogsnes
Web editor: Martin Brynildsrud Andersson
Phone: +47 23 95 00 00
E-mail: post@mfa.no
Employees in the Ministry: Depkatalog
Organisation number: 972 417 920
