The war in Gaza remained in sharp focus on the fourth day of the General Assembly’s annual high-level debate in a week that began with a conference for Palestinian statehood amid growing support among Member States for a sovereign State of Palestine.
Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel, was first to take the podium, met by a walkout of several delegations and an audibly mixed reception among those who remained. “The curse of Iran’s terror axis” threatened global peace and stability in the Middle East, as well as “the very existence of my country, Israel”, he said.
Describing his country’s strikes against Iran’s forces across the Middle East since the 7 October 2023 Hamas attacks and which targeted Iran’s atomic weapons and ballistic missile programmes, he stressed that Iran must not be allowed to rebuild its military nuclear capacities and that Security Council sanctions on that country “must be snapped back”.
He demanded Hamas’ leaders to free the hostages who remain in Gaza now. “Let my people go,” he said, stressing that his words are being transmitted live to the cell phones of Gazans, and warning that if they do not, “Israel will hunt you down.” “If Hamas agrees to our demands, the war could end right now.” Gaza would be demilitarized; Israel would retain overriding security control and a peaceful civilian authority would be established by Gazans and others committed to peace with Israel.
Sharp Rebuke of ‘Genocidal’ Actions
Other leaders, however, including Shehbaz Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan, called out the genocidal onslaught in Gaza. Micheál Martin, Taoiseach of Ireland, stressed that no crime, however heinous, can justify genocide. “The continuation of this course of action will ultimately harm Israel’s own interests, leading to an erosion of international support,” warned Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime Minister of Greece.
“Surely, the hottest part of hell is reserved for these perpetrators of genocide and those who are complicit in it,” said Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. He called for the “tragedy in Palestine” to stop — an appeal that was echoed throughout the debate.
Postcard from the Frontlines of Climate Change: Act Now
Prime Minister Gonsalves was one of many leaders from fellow island States and climate vulnerable nations to sound the alarm on the existential threat of climate change, calling out powerful, more influential countries for reneging on their commitments.
“This is not a distant threat. It is here. It is now. And it demands urgent action,” asserted Tshering Tobgay, Prime Minister of Bhutan. Despite the efforts of his country, a carbon-negative nation, to protect the environment, he said Bhutan’s mountains are warming at nearly twice the global average and centuries-old glaciers shrinking at alarming rates. “Net-zero cannot be the finish line” and every nation must work urgently to slash emissions and achieve carbon neutrality.
Echoing that alarm, Feleti Teo, Prime Minister of Tuvalu, said that climate change and sea-level rise pose the greatest security threats to his country — reiterating his “strong international advocation for the special case of Tuvalu as the most vulnerable of the most vulnerable countries” to the phenomena.
The ocean “is not scenery” stated Gaston Browne, Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda – rather the source of food, jobs and development for his region. Voicing support for a moratorium on seabed mining, he stressed: “No one should mortgage the ocean floor to pay short-term bills.”
Mia Amor Mottley, Prime Minister of Barbados, urged Member States to find common ground on climate focusing on emissions, including working on a legally binding framework on methane to reverse global temperatures.
Emitters on Notice
Muhammad Yunus, Chief Adviser of the interim Government of Bangladesh, called for intensified mitigation and adaptation efforts, noting that his country will include both in its nationally determined contribution at the thirtieth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP30). “We expect the global community, particularly the high-emitting countries, to meet their responsibilities with sincerity,” he stressed.
Echoing that plea, Andrew Holness, Prime Minister of Jamaica, urged developed countries to honour their commitments. His country is committed to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 and implementing a national adaptation plan with specific measures to build resilience, despite limited resources, he said, calling for predictable and accessible finance.
Malta is at “at the frontline of rising temperatures and rising sea-levels”, emphasized its Prime Minister, Robert Abela, calling for greater financial support to small island developing States that are the most threatened by man-made climate change and must adapt quickly. “And the adaptation must not cause a financial burden to our citizens,” he insisted.
States Legally Bound to Prevent Climate Harm
Calling climate change “a crisis multiplier”, Jeremiah Manele, Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, stressed: “Contrary to what we heard here a few days ago, the science on climate change is clear and my people are suffering from it.” He welcomed the International Court of Justice advisory opinion on States’ obligation to protect the climate system under international law and prescribing legal consequences for those that cause significant harm to it.
The Court also acknowledged that countries must respect the principle of non-refoulement for those displaced by climate change when their lands become uninhabitable, he added. “For us small island developing States, this recognition is existential,” he said. “Though small in size, our island nations are large in purpose”, he said, expressing gratitude to Vanuatu and the Pacific youth who brought the initiative to The Hague.
Sitiveni Ligamamada Rabuka, Prime Minister of Fiji, called for a legal definition for those island communities that may find it impossible to remain on their islands. Merely referred to as “displaced people”, he warned that such Pacific peoples “will be landless before they become stateless, stripping them further of their dignity”.
Fighting a Common Enemy: Terrorism
Several speakers took up the fight against terrorism. Robert Komlan Edo Dussey, Togo’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and Togolese Abroad, said his country is making significant progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals but “the efforts made in this way are not immune to the terrorist threats that weigh on the Sahel and the whole of West Africa”.
Three countries in the region — Burkina Faso, Niger and Mali — are working closely together “in a spirit of collaboration and complementarity never seen before” to fight imperialistic forces and armed groups who are attacking the foundations of their States with “dark-age thinking” and foreign State sponsors, said Abdoulaye Maïga, Mali’s Prime Minister and Minister of Territorial Administration and Decentralization.
“Unlike some States who open safe passage corridors on their territories for terrorists”, the founders of this alliance are making their countries safer and preventing this threat from spreading to other African countries following the withdrawal of international forces, he said.
Below are full summaries of the speakers in today’s general debate
Israel: Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of the State of Israel, holding up a poster titled “The Curse”, said it shows “the curse of Iran’s terror axis”. “This axis threatened the peace of the entire world, the stability of our region and the very existence of my country, Israel,” he underscored. Iran was developing massive nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes, he said, meant not only to destroy Israel but to threaten the United States and “blackmail nations everywhere”. Describing attacks by Iran’s forces against Israel launched from Gaza on 7 October 2023, and those that followed from Lebanon, Syria and Yemen, he said that over the past year, his country has “hammered the Houthis […], crushed the bulk of Hamas’ terror machine, crippled Hizbullah, destroyed Assad’s armaments in Syria and deterred Iran’s Shi’ite militias in Iraq”. Most importantly, Israel has devastated Iran’s atomic weapons and ballistic missile programmes, he said.
Recalling “Israel’s 12-day war in Iran”, he thanked “President [Donald J.] Trump for his bold and decisive action” with Israel to deliver on “the promise of preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons”. “We removed an existential threat to Israel and a mortal threat to the civilized world,” he declared. “We must not allow Iran to rebuild its military nuclear capacities,” he said, adding: “Tomorrow, UN Security Council sanctions on Iran must be snapped back.” However, the final remnants of Hamas remain in Gaza City, and they vow to repeat the atrocities of 7 October 2023. He lamented that “much of the world no longer remembers 7 October [2023]”, naming the 20 living Israeli hostages who remain in Gaza. Addressing them, he said: “We have not forgotten you. The people of Israel are with you. We will not rest; we will not falter until we bring all of you home.”
Noting that his “words are also being streamed live to the cell phones of Gazans”, he addressed Hamas’ leaders, declaring: “Lay down your arms. Let my people go. Free the hostages — all of them, the whole 48. Free the hostages now!” He warned: “If you do, you will live. If you don’t, Israel will hunt you down.” He underscored that “if Hamas agrees to our demands, the war could end right now”. Gaza would be demilitarized, Israel would retain overriding security control and a peaceful civilian authority would be established by Gazans and others committed to peace with Israel.
Stressing that “our enemies are your enemies”, he voiced appreciation for President Trump’s administration, which is “forcefully fighting the scourge of antisemitism”. However, others “reward the worst antisemites on Earth”, he said, recalling that this week the leaders of France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and others unconditionally recognized a Palestinian State. Peace is possible between Israel and countries in the region, he said, encouraging their cooperation with Israel, which would bring them benefits in medicine, science, defence and other fields. “In the coming years, the Middle East will look dramatically different,” he said, voicing hope that “brave peacemakers” will today replace those who waged war in Israel and who will then be gone.
Pakistan: Shehbaz Sharif, Prime Minister
Shehbaz Sharif, Prime Minister of Pakistan, described multilateralism as “the need of the hour”. While his country believes in the peaceful settlement of disputes, last May it confronted unprovoked aggression from its eastern front, resulting in seven Indian jets turned to scrap and dust. “Though in a position of strength, Pakistan agreed to a ceasefire facilitated by [United States] President Donald Trump,” he continued, recalling that Pakistan nominated Mr. Trump for the Nobel Peace Prize. “We have won the war and now we seek to win peace in our part of the world,” he emphasized, calling for a comprehensive and result-oriented dialogue with India on the outstanding issues of the Indus River and “the inseparable right of our 240 million people on these waters”. He expressed hope that Kashmir will gain its right to self-determination.
Turning to the plight of the Palestinian people, he said Israel's genocidal onslaught has unleashed unspeakable terror upon women and children, stressing that the smallest coffins are the heaviest to carry. “For I too carried the tiny coffin of a seven-year-old, Irtiza Abbas, during the recent confrontation with India,” he added, urging the world not to fail any child anywhere in the world. Israel's attack on Doha and its continued violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of numerous countries reflects its rogue behavior, he noted. “We also support all efforts for a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine conflict in line with the UN Charter,” he said.
Stating that Pakistan has a direct stake in a peaceful Afghanistan whose interim Government must uphold human rights, including women's rights, he urged the Afghan Government to take effective action against terrorist groups and ensure that Afghan soil is not used for terrorism against any country. “There must be no space for hate speech, discrimination or violence against any person or against any religion,” he continued. “Hate-driven ideology, such as India's Hindutva-driven extremism, poses a danger to the entire world.”
On the climate crisis, he recalled that in 2022, Pakistan faced massive floods that cost $34 billion in losses. “This year again we are dealing with another mega-flood with thousands of villages washed away from the face of the earth, millions of people displaced,” he said, spotlighting that Pakistan contributes less than 1 per cent to global emissions annually. He praised all weather cooperation with China through the Belt and Road Initiative. “I admire the vision and foresight of President Xi Jinping, whose recently launched Global Governance Initiative, along with other global initiatives, offers a comprehensive framework for a more just, fair and inclusive development,” he stressed.
China: Li Qiang, Premier
Li Qiang, Premier of China, said that the past 80 years of the United Nations have been “torturous but purposeful”. Peace and development are the strongest aspirations of peoples of all countries, and it is incumbent on the current generation to strengthen their voices. Solidarity and cooperation are the most powerful drivers for human progress. “Solidarity lifts everyone up while division drags all down,” he said. The road ahead might be bumpy, but when all countries unite and collaborate in good faith, they are a mighty force that can withstand any headwind. Fairness and justice are the most important values pursued by the international community. When might dictates right, the world “risks division and regression”. The major countries, in particular, should uphold justice while pursuing interests, he asserted.
The world has entered a new period of turbulence and transformation, with unilateralism re-emerging, he emphasized. The once effective international system is constantly disrupted, with “distressing and worrying” outcomes. “Humanity has once again come to a cross-roads,” he said, asking how the world can allow the ardent passion of the UN founders to fade into history. Citing the maxim, “Never forget why you started, and you can accomplish your mission”, he stressed: “We can definitely create a better future together.” China’s Global Governance Initiative underscores the principles of sovereign equality — practicing multilateralism, taking a people-centred approach, focusing on real actions and offering a pathway to a more just, equitable governance system. His country is ready to coordinate and take effective actions to promote global peace and development.
“All countries belong to the same global village and rely on each other for security,” he said, adding that the legitimate security concerns of all countries must be respected, and differences settled peacefully through dialogue. China is the biggest contributor to the UN peacekeeping budget and, of the permanent Council Members, the largest provider of peacekeepers. It will continue to promote peace talks on Ukraine and the Palestine-Israel conflict. Cooperation must be reinvigorated and win-win results pursued, he said, pointing to unilateral and protectionist measures, such as tariff hikes, as a major cause of sluggish global growth. He called for closer collaboration to identify and expand the convergence of interests, for promoting universally beneficial and inclusive economic globalization, and for helping each other succeed by moving in the same direction. China has been a steady contributor to global development, including by opening its doors to the world and lowering its tariff level.
Every civilization deserves respect, he said, stressing that obsession with “civilizational superiority” only breeds more division and confrontation. Adopting an inclusive attitude is a sure way to build more consensus and collective strength. Over the next five years, China will carry out 50 development cooperation programmes in the area of culture and civilization for fellow developing countries and host 200 thematic training and seminar programmes on inter-civilizational dialogue and progress. On climate change, he said countries must uphold common but differentiated responsibilities and promote effective implementation of the Paris Agreement. As technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) and biomanufacturing advance rapidly, he called for people-centred development, technology for good and equitable benefits. Rules and governance must be quickly strengthened, he added, highlighting that his country has the largest and fastest-growing renewable energy system and has proposed the Global AI Governance Initiative.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines: Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister
Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, emphasized that though the world is “more dangerous than ever […] a better tomorrow is possible — even as catastrophes loom and dangers lurk”. In a bid for unity amid global power struggles, he declared that “the intractable problems facing humanity cannot be solved by any one nation acting unilaterally”. A mature multilateralism is needed to address threats and pursue peaceful coexistence. “We cannot give up,” he said, addressing long-standing disputes and conflicts across the world.
On Gaza and the West Bank, he said: “Surely, the hottest part of hell is reserved for these perpetrators of genocide and those who are complicit in it,” calling for the “tragedy in Palestine” to stop. He advocated for peace in the Taiwan Straits and “the participation of Taiwan in the specialized agencies of the United Nations”, describing the absence of the democratic country with a population of 23 million people as “a continuing absurdity”.
Similarly, he pressed the United States to lift the “oppressive” embargo on Cuba and insisted that Washington, D.C., and Venezuela cease “ramping up” tensions in the Caribbean and Latin American-declared “zone of peace”. Unilateral militarization is not a way to end drug trafficking, he emphasized, favouring transnational cooperation. On Haiti, he decried a lack of political will from its leaders and by the Security Council to remedy the situation.
Climate change is urgent and existential, he continued, stressing that “the science is clear,” but powerful, more influential countries are “reneging on their earlier commitments”. He recalled the 2024 category 4 hurricane Beryl that devastated his country with loss and damage coming to one third of its gross domestic product (GDP). Detailing reconstruction efforts with some regional and international partners, he called for greater support. Concluding with messages to “dominant metropoles of the West and the East”, he said the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are “not appendages to any other nation”, and that small States play an important role in global affairs.
Luxembourg: Luc Frieden, Prime Minister
“The international order is at breaking point. Too few defend it. Too many have lost faith in it,” underscored Luc Frieden, Prime Minister of Luxembourg. However, for his country, “the UN still represents the highest of mankind’s ambitions”, he said, adding that the UN's establishment was the beginning of the journey to peace, which must be “made anew every single day”. Calling war “the final expression of that radical unwillingness to compromise”, he stressed: "It is this uncompromising spirit that starts wars, creates divisions and hinders progress, leaving all of us worse off.” However, the UN stands for “the relentless pursuit of compromise, for the formidable power of reconciliation”.
But the Organization’s success “depends on all of us”, he underscored. He urged Member States to adopt this spirit of compromise and reconciliation, as they work for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine and an immediate ceasefire and full humanitarian access in Gaza, as well as for the release of all hostages. That spirit is also needed to realize the two-State solution, he said, recalling his country's formal recognition of the State of Palestine this week. Luxembourg will be a reliable partner in these efforts, including in work to ensure equal rights, educate all children, eradicate hunger and disease, protect cultural heritage and create a United Nations that is fit for purpose.
Underscoring the value of a stable, multilateral world order, he noted that Luxembourg is one of the largest per capita donors to official development assistance (ODA), consistently contributing 1 per cent of its gross national income. This week, it signed four new strategic partnership frameworks with “crucial UN agencies”. He noted that, "when the war ends and the dust settles on ruined cities and unnecessary cemeteries”, that uncompromising spirit must still give way. “We must still live together. We must still talk and work with each other. We still share a common planet and a common humanity,” he said.
He called on all countries to “seek peace by taking a new approach”, one that places dialogue first and makes every effort to settle differences peacefully and through mutually acceptable compromises. “Let’s do it to honour those working here and across the world in the interest of all of humanity […] those generations before us who built this institution […] and above all, the generations yet to come, who have every right to expect growing up in a world of peace, freedom and prosperity,” he urged.
Ireland: Micheál Martin, Taoiseach
Micheál Martin, Taoiseach of Ireland, recalled that the UN was born after “a deliberate, industrial-scale genocide, aimed at obliterating Europe’s Jewish population, saw 6 million people murdered — a monstrous crime that remains unsurpassed in human history.” He expressed concern over the constant pushback on human rights that has accelerated in recent years, against women’s rights and gender equality, against LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual and queer] rights. “I call out the brutal Taliban for their denial of the most fundamental rights of Afghanistan’s women and girls,” he said.
The Irish people are enormously proud of 67 years of continuous UN peacekeeping, especially their engagement with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and close connection to Lebanon. “In Sudan, a grave humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding,” he continued, recalling that more than 150,000 people are dead and 12 million are displaced. “Famine [was] declared throughout the country. The world has failed Sudan,” he emphasized, adding that the perpetrators of war crimes in Sudan must be held to account and the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court should be extended to all of Sudan.
Saying that a “brutal and bloody war has returned to European soil” and tens of thousands of Ukrainians have been killed and maimed, he stressed that Moscow has deliberately and cynically targeted civilians and civilian infrastructure, with cities such as Mariupol, Kharkiv and Bakhmut bombed to rubble. “President Putin has thumbed his nose at every attempt to bring about a ceasefire and negotiations, including those led by President Trump,” he said. “There are no signs whatsoever that he is ready for peace.” As Putin has sought to test the resolve of Ukraine’s neighbours, sending drones into Polish and Romanian airspace, “he should know that it will not work”, he underscored, pledging to increase support for Ukraine.
Turning to Gaza, “a catastrophe of the most monumental and consequential kind”, he acknowledged those working in the most unimaginably difficult circumstances to preserve and sustain life and to treat the injured. “At the heart of this vital effort have been UN agencies and workers, most especially UNRWA [United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East],” he said. Recalling babies starving to death while aid rots at the border, as well as the deliberate targeting and destruction of schools, hospitals, mosques, cultural institutions and the killing of doctors, aid workers and journalists, he stated: “We are all witnesses to the immense wrath of one of the world’s most modern and best-equipped armies brought to bear on a trapped and defenceless civilian population.” Those responsible for the 7 October 2023 attack on Israel — which was a monstrous war crime — must be held to account, he said, adding that Hamas, not the Palestinian people, were responsible but no crime, however heinous, can justify genocide.
Bangladesh: Muhammad Yunus, Chief Adviser of the Interim Government
Muhammad Yunus, Chief Adviser of the interim Government of Bangladesh, underscored the successes of the UN in providing health, food and humanitarian support, while noting its limitations in resolving conflicts. Bangladesh recently saw a popular uprising and has come far in its aspirations for transformation. Its story is a reminder of “the extraordinary power of ordinary people”, he said. “No matter how deep the crisis, no matter how impossible the solution may seem, the path to renewal is never lost,” he said. His country’s youth stood up to tyranny in July 2024, advocating for a just and equal society. He and his fellow leaders now have the responsibility to rebuild a devastated economy and State. Rather than using executive orders, they have chosen the hard path: “reforms built through inclusion and sustained through consensus”. It is a path that endures, he said.
The goal is to “create a democratic order where power is balanced, where no autocrat can ever return, where no elected leader can destroy democracy and where those who are meant to protect the people can never again prey upon them”. Leaders in Bangladesh are using independent commissions to consult citizens and produce a reform proposal. The National Consensus Commission has crossed political divides to create a collective pledge: placing citizens at the centre of reforms and focusing on transparency, accountability and the rule of law. Alongside the UN, they are documenting human rights abuses of the past autocracy, aiming to ensure they are never repeated. Recovering the assets stolen from Bangladesh is now among the highest priorities. This will require political commitment from other countries, as billions of dollars were siphoned abroad through corruption over the past 15 years.
He said the global financial system has “failed to prevent the illicit transfer of resources from developing nations”, denouncing its rules that enable the movement of vast sums of illegal money into tax havens. Countries and institutions that shelter stolen assets must “return the wealth to its rightful owners — the farmers, the workers and the ordinary taxpayers”. He proposed the adoption and enforcement of strong international regulations to prevent the plunder of resources from developing countries and to ensure their return when stolen. Likewise, international cooperation is needed on climate change. Efforts for mitigation and adaptation must be intensified. Bangladesh will include both in its Nationally Determined Contribution at the thirtieth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP30). “We expect the global community, particularly the high-emitting countries, to meet their responsibilities with sincerity.”
Another great challenge is the rise of global trade protectionism, he emphasized. Without economic interdependence, conflicts will multiply, and development will falter. In that context, he said reversal of the “marginalization of the Rohingya cannot wait any further”. Most of the discriminatory policies against them can be reversed without a comprehensive national political settlement in Myanmar. Speaking broadly, he warned, the “truth before us is frightening” and stressed that “extreme nationalism, geopolitics that thrive on the suffering of others, and indifference to human pain are destroying the progress humanity has built through decades of struggle”. This tragedy is most visible in Gaza. The two-State solution must be implemented now. He described three goals on which young people must be able to build the future: zero carbon, zero wealth concentration and zero unemployment. “Let the dream of a three-zero world be the dream of all nations.”
Malta: Robert Abela, Prime Minister
Robert Abela, Prime Minister of Malta, said the 80th anniversary of the United Nations “should be less of a birthday party and more of a wake-up call”. Acknowledging the necessity of the Organisation in a world “too much in flames”, he called for a transparent selection process for the next Secretary-General — not political bargaining — and an expanded Security Council to “serve as a greater counterbalance to the dominance of the larger powers”. Though a small country, Malta “has a deep commitment to the power of multilateral engagement”, he continued, highlighting its participation at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe.
Further, neutrality is enshrined in his country’s constitution which positions the nation as a bridge builder. “Sadly, on Malta’s doorstep, two such conflicts, wars, are raging,” he said, first addressing the Russian Federation’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine over three years ago: “Malta remains resolute […] in demanding a lasting and just peace that guarantees Ukraine’s sovereignty”. Kyiv must be involved in any future peace talks.
“So too must there be an immediate and permanent ceasefire in Gaza,” he continued, calling for the immediate release of the remaining hostages held by Hamas and unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid into the Strip. Earlier this week, Malta recognized the State of Palestine, he said, underscoring that a “two-state solution — no — isn’t a reward for Hamas; it is the only way […] to finally banish the evil of Hamas”.
In that vein he called for an internationally coordinated response to address the root causes of migration, such as poverty and conflict, and urged “every Member of the United Nations to recommit to the primacy of international law”. As Malta is at “at the frontline of rising temperatures and rising sea-levels”, he pressed for greater financial support to small island developing States that are the most threatened by man-made climate change and must adapt quickly. “And the adaptation must not cause a financial burden to our citizens,” he noted. In the face of “unprecedented challenges,” the world must “double down” on multilateralism,” he concluded.
Greece: Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime Minister
Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Prime Minister of Greece, said a new global order is on the rise, with attempts to revive the imperial ambitions of previous centuries and some leaders trapped in the past, chasing illusions of bygone glory. His country is allocating over 3 per cent of its GDP to defence and is ready to do more. “With war returning to our continent, there is simply no other option,” he said. Citing 7 October 2023, he said Greece has advocated for Israel’s right to defend itself against a terrorist organization that rejects Israel’s right to exist, but he added that no military can justify the death of thousands of children and the humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian people. “The continuation of this course of action will ultimately harm Israel’s own interests, leading to an erosion of international support,” he stressed.
The war in Ukraine is not another regional European conflict, he continued. “It is a fight for freedom, for democracy and for dignity itself; it is, above all, a defence of the rules-based global order,” he said, pledging to continue support to the Ukrainian people, who have the right to live in peace and security and freely determine their future. There can be no peace formula without Ukraine at the table, and there can be no acceptance, under any circumstances, of borders redrawn by force. The world must also not forget the people of Sudan. “We owe them nothing less than peace, and the chance of a future built on hope, not despair,” he underscored.
While Greece seeks peaceful coexistence with Türkiye, he said the calm seas witnessed over the past two years must not be fleeting. As the only major outstanding issue between the two countries is the delimitation of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone, “Türkiye must remove the threat of war against Greece that still hangs as a dark cloud over our relations”, he said. “For 51 years, Cyprus has endured the consequences of Türkiye’s illegal invasion and continued military occupation,” he continued, voicing commitment to Cyprus’ sovereignty, its territorial integrity and the solution of one State based on a bizonal, bicommunal federation.
Turning to other neighbours, he said the Libyan people must be free to determine their future without foreign interference and that Syria’s future must be built on tolerance, dialogue and full political representation for all religious and ethnic communities. The future of the Western Balkans lies within the European Union, he said, adding that the ghosts of Balkan nationalism had haunted the region for centuries and must not be allowed to reemerge. On artificial intelligence, he stressed that in the wrong hands and without safeguards, it can become extremely dangerous. Big platforms can no longer profit at the expense of children’s mental health, he insisted.
Bhutan: Tshering Tobgay, Prime Minister
Tshering Tobgay, Prime Minister of Bhutan, voicing support for UN reform, said the Council must be expanded both in permanent and non-permanent membership. “A reformed Council must include deserving nations such as India and Japan alongside other capable and leading countries to reflect today’s complex realities,” he added. UN reform means also equipping it to “confront the defining challenge of our time — the climate crisis”. His country has endeavoured to protect its forests and keep its rivers pristine. It takes pride in being carbon-negative, he said, adding that every year, it sequesters over five times the carbon it emits — “a contribution far exceeding our size and resources”.
Despite these efforts, Bhutan is confronting the harsh realities of climate change, he said. Describing mountains warming at nearly twice the global average, centuries-old glaciers shrinking at alarming rates and rivers swelling unpredictably into destructive floods during summer yet often dry in winter, he stressed: “This is not a distant threat. It is here. It is now. And it demands urgent action.” Every country must strive to reduce emissions and aim for carbon neutrality. Yet, global efforts remain far behind what the science demands.
He voiced regret that only four countries — Bhutan, Panama, Suriname and Madagascar — are carbon-neutral. The G-Zero Forum, which they launched at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in November 2024, is a coalition aiming to accelerate climate ambition. Stressing that “net-zero cannot be the finish line”, he said every nation must work urgently to slash emissions and achieve carbon neutrality. Bhutan will share best practices and technologies and champion nature-based solutions, he said, inviting all countries and partners to join in that effort.
He noted that, according to the United Nations, over half of humanity now lives in urban areas, and by 2050 nearly 70 per cent will call cities home. "This makes cities both the engines of innovation and the front lines of our greatest challenges — challenges like unsustainable consumption, environmental degradation and rising inequality,” he underscored. The Gelephu Mindfulness City in Bhutan is powered by renewable energy, built with sustainable materials and designed for low-carbon living, he said, and could serve as a forerunner in rethinking urbanization. He invited all to join the Global Peace Prayer Festival, from 4 to 17 November, which will unite spiritual masters, scholars and practitioners from across the world in a common aspiration for peace, healing and harmony.
Barbados: Mia Amor Mottley, Prime Minister
Mia Amor Mottley, the Prime Minister of Barbados, said that of all the crises facing the world, there is one deeper crisis undermining global institutions: the crisis of truth. “When we lose shared trust, our global society loses its centre of gravity,” she asserted, and political tribalism takes hold. Trust between neighbours, the governed and the governing in institutions, in the social order, in health systems, in global rules and governance structures — “it all seems to be falling apart”. Without truth and trust, “news becomes spectacle, and science becomes just another opinion”. The world today resembles that of 100 years ago, evidenced by the closing of borders to goods and people and magnified by geopolitical tensions. “Disturbingly, war only entered the daily lexicon of the West not when thousands were dying on the continent of Africa but when war became a reality in Ukraine.”
She drew attention to the hundreds of thousands of people trapped in the Sudanese city of El Fasher and the “genocidal destruction” taking place in Gaza. “It is happening now on our watch.” The world needs a reset, firstly by deciding whether there is still agreement on the values that inform the Charter. As well as multiple conflicts, other issues threaten the planet’s stability, including the climate crisis, food insecurity, water scarcity, the mass flows of refugees and displaced persons, poverty, inequality and unregulated artificial intelligence. The UN has not done better because countries have lacked the political will to live by the Charter and “do what is right by humanity”. The Charter was designed to promote compassion, equality and fairness, and this is why the rules-based system must be maintained. If one country or a few leave the order, that does not mean it cannot continue, she said.
There is a case for making efficiency gains at the UN, but once that is done, members must “put their money where their mouth is” and provide the funds to deliver the desired results. “We must [...] understand that we can no longer complain about the absence or behaviour of a country and not ourselves be prepared to make wrong things right. It is as simple as that.” She highlighted the successes of international commitments, including on pandemics, financial elements of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), combating antimicrobial resistance, oceans and biodiversity. Barbados sees no future without a rules-based system. The UN is still working, but not at optimum levels. There is still much to do on climate and finance, on which debates risk being reduced to performative exercises.
Common ground must be found on climate. She proposed focusing on emissions, including working on a legally binding framework on methane to reverse global temperatures. Global initiatives must be people-focused and delivery-driven, providing the global population with the peace, security and quality of life it deserves and is increasingly demanding. The Council must be reformed to reflect the multipolar world that now exists. “You really cannot ask us to show up for family photos and votes when you need them and then exclude us from the family’s decision-making as if you are the grown-ups and we are the children,” she said. She highlighted the crisis in Haiti and called for dialogue, particularly engaging the United States on the flow of small arms and light weapons. On the military build-up in the Caribbean, she warned of its risks and said there must be greater effort for dialogue to prevent war.
Solomon Islands: Jeremiah Manele, Prime Minister
Jeremiah Manele, Prime Minister of Solomon Islands, painted a grim picture of a world marked by conflicts, widening inequalities and the erosion of UN Charter principles. “The world is now over-armed, spending less on development and [has] increasingly adopted a militarized posture,” he said, calling for an end to such escalation. Solomon Islands “seek a region free from nuclear weapons, militarization, trafficking of illicit drugs and geopolitical posturing”. In that vein, the subregion adopted the Ocean of Peace Declaration, a vision for a resilient and peaceful Blue Pacific continent. On climate change, a “crisis multiplier that is defining our future”, he called for urgent action to put the world back on a track towards the agreed-upon goal of 1.5 degrees.
Large emission producers must drastically cut them, he stressed. “Contrary to what we heard here a few days ago, the science on climate change is clear and my people are suffering from it”. He welcomed the recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) advisory opinion on the obligation of States to protect the climate system under international law and prescribing legal consequences for those that cause significant harm to it.
Moreover, the Court also acknowledged that countries must respect the principle of non-refoulement for those displaced by climate change when their lands become uninhabitable. “For us small island developing States, this recognition is existential, and it reminds us that climate obligations are […] owed to the world as a whole,” he said. Voicing gratitude for Vanuatu and the Pacific youth who brought the initiative to The Hague, he noted that “though small in size, our island nations are large in purpose”.
He emphasized the importance of the ocean to the lives of the people of the archipelago, highlighting the conference it hosted on sustainable fishing this year and its ban on the use of some single-use plastics in 2023. He voiced concern that negotiations on a legally binding treaty on plastic pollution has stalled. He also recalled that the Pacific region has been used to test weapons and to store and discharge nuclear waste. Unexploded ordinances from the Second World War are still buried in the region, polluting it with carcinogenic substances. “This is the cruel reality of a war we never chose, yet whose scars we continue to carry. Justice demands that those responsible accept their duty to help heal the wounds they left behind,” he stressed.
Papua New Guinea: James Marape, Prime Minister
James Marape, Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, said that this year, his country celebrates 50 years of independence and 50 years of membership in the United Nations. The national Constitution that has endured for half a century protects human rights, affirms Christian heritage while guaranteeing freedom of religion, safeguards culture and protects environment, while Papua New Guinea is extraordinarily diverse — with over 1,000 tribes living on 600 islands, he said.
The Constitution binds his people as one nation and one country, he emphasized, adding that Papua New Guinea has known conflicts. For a decade, the island of Bougainville suffered violence, but through dialogue under UN oversight, the country achieved the 2001 Bougainville Peace Agreement. Not a bullet has been fired since it was signed, he continued. Earlier this year, Secretary-General António Guterres visited Papua New Guinea and praised its achievements but also recalled the need to fight corruption.
He went on to say that Papua New Guinea’s tropical forests absorb carbon and produce oxygen, vast Pacific waters are part of the world’s greatest carbon sink and the nation’s rivers, reefs and ecosystems shelter unique biodiversity. “Our ancestors passed on a liveable planet to us,” he emphasized. Just as Papua New Guinea finds unity in its diversity, the world can do likewise. “Peace is built and sustained through dialogue and not through war,” he said. “This one planet must be preserved for all generations,” he concluded.
Jamaica: Andrew Holness, Prime Minister
Andrew Holness, the Prime Minister of Jamaica, emphasized that the UN80 initiative is an opportunity to strengthen a multilateral system that requires urgent reform and revitalization to meet today’s needs. “We must build a system that is more democratic, representative and responsive to evolving challenges”. He advocated a future in which multilateralism works for all, “no country is too small to be heard,” and the benefits of globalization are equally shared. He underscored that climate change is a daily reality for small island developing States like Jamaica, setting back decades of hard-won progress. Jamaica has shown leadership in climate action despite limited resources, including being committed to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 and implementing a National Adaptation Plan with specific measures to build resilience. But predictable and accessible finance is needed. Developed countries must honour their commitments.
He noted that the global finance system is “fundamentally flawed”, penalizing reforming economies like Jamaica with high borrowing costs while ignoring its vulnerabilities. Despite improved debt ratios, Jamaica remains locked out of concessional financing because of outdated metrics based only on per-capita income. Jamaica supports the application of the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index that more accurately assesses countries' development needs and their eligibility for concessional financing. Constructive dialogue and engagement are the best path forward for the people of Cuba to fully participate in the global economy. Jamaica condemns the 7 October 2023 attack on Israel and deeply regrets the devastating humanitarian consequences of the counter-offensive in the Palestinian territories. There must be a just and peaceful resolution through diplomacy and dialogue. He supports the call for a ceasefire and the release of all remaining hostages.
On the crisis in Haiti, he urged Member States, especially in the Council, to operationalize the Secretary-General’s recommendations for a transition to a more robust hybrid mechanism to address the situation. He called on Member States to provide the financial and logistical support to ensure the success of this initiative. Governance deficits and a fragile institutional framework in Haiti must also be addressed. Once stability is restored, the international community must help rebuild democratic institutions, ensure free and fair elections, expand humanitarian relief and invest in infrastructure to support long-term stability. “Haiti’s recovery requires sustained global support”.
Turning to transnational crime, he said, criminal networks trafficking arms, narcotics and people are existential threats that destabilize institutions. He called for a “global war on gangs” — a coordinated international campaign to cut off the flow of weapons, money and influence that sustain them. He welcomed cooperation with all partners in this fight, including through the interception of drug trafficking vessels, provided that operations are carried out with full respect for international law and human rights, and with the coordination and collaboration of countries in the region. He called for a united front against transnational crime, “with the same urgency, resources, and coordination the world has applied to terrorism”.
Belize: John Briceño, Prime Minister
John Briceño, Prime Minister of Belize, said that “if the UN has fallen short of its promise, […] it is because too often its members — including the most powerful among us — have failed to act”. The consequences are visible in six nuclear powers being drawn into conflicts in Asia, Europe and the Middle East, as well as a ballooning global military spend rising to more than half the GDP of Latin America and the Caribbean. The conflicts in Gaza, Ukraine and Sudan demonstrate a pattern of disregard for international law, impunity and cynicism.
For its part, Belize has acted with restraint through the channel of the ICJ, in the face of aggressive actions by Guatemala. “Latin America and the Caribbean are committed to maintaining our region as a zone of peace […] where conflicts are prevented through dialogue,” he noted. In that vein, he voiced concern over the use of “military tactics” against civilian vessels in the Caribbean Sea. On climate change, he pointed out that Belize is the fifth most vulnerable small island developing State to climate risk.
“Rising seas are already displacing some coastal communities, extreme heat strains our energy systems and unpredictable rainfall threatens our farmers,” he continued, calling for: “urgent attention” to the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for Small Island Developing States; mainstreaming the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index; and expanding grants and concessional finance, instead of debt.
At the thirtieth UN Climate Change Conference in Belem, Belize will urge the Group of 20 (G20) — responsible for 80 per cent of emissions — to commit to more ambitious emission-reduction targets. Developed nations must mobilize $1.3 trillion in climate finance, prioritizing small island developing States, he declared. Only one per cent of climate finance goes to them while the fossil fuel industry receives trillions of dollars annually in subsidies, which is “not just perverse, it is dangerous”. Calling for more investment in “nature-based and nature-positive solutions”, he underscored that only five years remain to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Lesotho: Ntsokoane Samuel Matekane, Prime Minister and Head of Government, and Minister for Defence, National Security and Environment
Ntsokoane Samuel Matekane, Prime Minister and Head of Government, and Minister for Defence, National Security and Environment, of Lesotho, said that despite the selfless contributions of UN leadership, his country is concerned about the budgetary constraints the Organization is facing, which derail the attainment of stated goals. He pinpointed “the ongoing volatility in global trade and the unilateral protectionist measures”, including selective adherence to the United Nations Charter, as the main challenges to the multilateral system. In addition, the apparent disregard of General Assembly decisions by some of the powerful members “undermines the credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations”, he said.
Calling for global support for his country’s reform efforts, he welcomed the Southern African Development Community (SADC) decision to formally remove Lesotho from its Organ Troika agenda of countries under special observations — a testament to Lesotho’s “significant milestone” in reforms. He urged development partners to honour their official development assistance commitments to safeguard vulnerable nations and prevent entrenched underdevelopment. For its part, his Government is curbing illicit financial flows and enhancing revenue administration to boost domestic resources. He spotlighted the Just Energy Transition Initiative, a programme involving the country’s pristine mountain waters, strong winds and year-round sunshine, adding: “Our goal is to harness these resources to achieve our domestic and regional energy security and climate adaptation.”
Because “digital transformation is reshaping our world”, he said his country is prioritizing investments in affordable digital infrastructure, promoting digital literacy and nurturing innovation ecosystems. He noted the disproportional effects of climate shocks on agriculture, a sector that remains the economic centre of landlocked and least developed countries. “To mitigate these impacts, greater investments in adaptation and resilience are essential,” he said, expressing his Government’s interest in hosting a regional agriculture research hub for the African continent.
He urged coordinated international action to address the global climate emergency and ecosystem degradation and highlighted the critical need to preserve biodiversity and ensure sustainable management of natural resources for climate adaptation. Underscoring the need for reform of the United Nations, 80 years on, he said the Organization must measure up to contemporary challenges, adding that “reform of the UN Security Council must not remain a distant aspiration eternally”. Further, he called for equitable representation in the Secretariat as well as “sensitivity to the vulnerabilities of developing States” in the context of the UN80 initiative.
Cabo Verde: José Ulisses Correia e Silva, Prime Minister
José Ulisses Correia e Silva, Prime Minister of Cabo Verde, said his country — an active and dynamic small island developing State committed to the multilateral agenda - currently holds the vice presidency of Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). Cabo Verde participated in the Third UN Ocean Conference and co-facilitated with Australia the negotiations that led to the Nice Declaration “Our Ocean, our future, our responsibilities”, containing firm commitments to the sustainability of the oceans. Stressing the need to operationalize the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index, the mechanisms for converting debt into climate finance and the Loss and Damage Fund, he stated: “The Antigua and Barbuda Plan of Action stands,” as its implementation into resilient prosperity is small island developing States’ greatest ambition.
Citing the historic achievement of the entry into force of the Agreement on Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction, he further welcomed the Special Meeting on Climate convened by Secretary-General António Guterres and Brazil’s President Lula da Silva in preparation for the upcoming UN Climate Change Conference in Belém, Brazil - a crucial moment for implementing the Paris Agreement. Small island developing States “demand clear commitments from all States, especially the largest emitters”, to limit the temperature increase to 1.5ºC. “This is not a mere claim, it is a matter of survival for all,” he stressed.
On threats to global peace and security, he condemned coups d’état, terrorism, genocide and assaults on the territorial integrity of countries - voicing support for a just, durable peace for the resolution of the war in Ukraine. He further called for the two-State solution, with “Israel and Palestine living side by side, in peace and security”. On Africa, he expressed commitment to preventing and combating terrorism and conflict, advocating for multilateralism and a strong and effective UN, converging with the principles of the Chinese Global Governance Initiative.
Cabo Verde belongs to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), a space of economic integration and neighbourhood, and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, a space for cultural affinities. Citing a “special partnership with the European Union”, he noted the country’s currency has been linked with a fixed parity to the Euro since 1998. “Due to our location” between Africa, Europe and the Americas, he said the European Union, the United States and Brazil are first-line partners in cooperative maritime security, preventing and combating drug trafficking, human trafficking, maritime piracy, illegal fishing and cybersecurity. Hailing “stable Cabo Verde, open to the world, and guided by trust in the relations with our partners”, he pointed out the country holds one of the vice-presidencies of the General Assembly.
Bulgaria: Rossen Jeliazkov, Prime Minister
Rossen Jeliazkov, Prime Minister of Bulgaria, a UN member for 70 years, renewed its pledge to the Charter and a future defined by unity. “For the UN to meet the tests of our time, reform is not a choice but an imperative,” he said, throwing his full support behind the Secretary-General’s UN80 initiative for mandate reviews, structural reform and more effective use of resources. At the institutional level, the Council must reform to reflect today’s world and be more effective, representative and accountable. “We need genuine progress, including a fairer balance in membership,” he said, including one additional non-permanent seat for the Eastern European Group and limits on the misuse of the veto. “The General Assembly must remain the heart of this Organization — our shared forum for dialogue and decision-making,” he said.
International peace and security have never been more threatened since the Charter’s adoption, and the Russian Federation’s full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine represents an existential challenge to the rules-based international order. “This is not merely a European conflict — it threatens the very legitimacy of the United Nations,” he said. The only path to peace is clear: Ukraine’s sovereignty must be respected, and its territorial integrity fully restored. Bulgaria consistently upholds UN principles at the regional level, engaging actively with the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation Council and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation. “We prioritize good-neighbourliness, human rights and the strengthening of trade, energy, transport and digital connectivity,” he said.
Bulgaria firmly supports European integration of the Western Balkans, “based on merit as the path to peace, stability and prosperity,” he said. The Black Sea region remains strategically important for European security and energy resilience, and Bulgaria works to make it a space of stability and sustainable development. On 1 July 2025, Bulgaria assumed the chairmanships of the South-East European Cooperation Process and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation, strengthening its leadership in advancing regional security, stability and resilience. As a member of the UN Human Rights Council for 2024–2026, Bulgaria is committed to advancing human rights through dialogue and cooperation.
As sustainable development cannot be separated from human rights, peace and security, Bulgaria remains fully committed to the 2030 Agenda, he said. On 23 July 2025, his country presented its Second Voluntary National Review at the High-Level Political Forum. As a steadfast contributor to global development, Bulgaria implements tangible projects and builds sustainable partnerships for a fairer, more balanced world through its “Bulgaria 2030” national development programme. “The journey ahead is long, but our resolve must be unwavering,” he said. “Let us commit, once again, to working hand in hand, to upholding the principles of the UN Charter and to ensuring that peace, dignity and opportunity become a reality for every person in the world.”
Mali: Abdoulaye Maïga, Prime Minister, Minister of Territorial Administration and Decentralization
Abdoulaye Maïga, Mali’s Prime Minister and Minister of Territorial Administration and Decentralization, drew attention to an alliance between his country, Burkina Faso, and Niger who have joined forces in a Pan-African spirit, to fight imperialistic forces and armed groups, who are attacking the foundations of their States with “dark-age thinking” and foreign State sponsors. The three countries of this Sahel alliance are working closely together “in a spirit of collaboration and complementarity never seen before”, he said, to defeat the scourge of terrorism and “fight our common enemies”. “Unlike some States who open safe passage corridors on their territories for terrorists”, the founders of this alliance are making their countries safer and preventing this threat from spreading to other African countries following the withdrawal of international forces.
Though it seems far away, the war in Ukraine and the terrorism in Sahel are connected, he said, adding that the Ukrainian regime has become one of the main suppliers of kamikaze drones to terrorists. Requesting Western States to stop supplying weapons to that country, he said the French regime, “nostalgic for the colonial era”, has been supporting the Ukrainian regime. Mali has requested a Security Council meeting so it can provide irrefutable proof of France’s support for terrorist activities, but this has not happened yet. The resources of the Sahel should benefit the people of the Sahel, he stressed, and the alliance’s Governments have launched homegrown development initiatives, and strategic investments in infrastructure and agricultural diversification.
On human rights, he said the alliance counties are committed to humanism but strongly opposed to the weaponization of human rights to interfere with national sovereignty. The three States withdrew from the Rome Statute recently and will prioritize “home-grown justice mechanisms”, he said, adding that some international partners have flexible morals, depending on their vested interests. Stressing the need for a reformed UN, he said that Africa has, for more than 20 years, been demanding more representation on the Security Council. The Organization must be able to guarantee respect for international law, he added, also calling for robust implementation mechanisms for the outcomes of international conferences.
Africa’s development concerns should be taken seriously — it is the continent of the future, but its resources are being pillaged, and it confronts heavy debt burdens and climate change. Due to his country’s Pan-Africanism and its geographical proximity with Algeria, Mali has always taken a constructive approach with that neighbour. However, this has not been returned, he said condemning a recent cowardly attack that targeted Malian forces. Regarding the destruction of a Malian drone by the Algerian junta on the pretext that it violated Algeria’s airspace, he said this accusation defies the laws of physics, since the drone was found on his country’s territory. Mali will reciprocate every attack, every insult, he said.
Andorra: Xavier Espot Zamora, Head of Government
Xavier Espot Zamora, Head of Government of Andorra, echoing his country’s motto, said “moral and political strength does not lie in imposition but in the unity of values, in shared coherence, and in collective virtue.” This lesson transcends borders and remains relevant in today’s world. He noted that while the times are difficult and marked by conflict, uncertainty and polarization, they provide the opportunity to strengthen international cooperation, improve associated institutions and create lasting solutions. He condemned the violation of international law in Ukraine, as well as its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Likewise, international humanitarian law should be respected in Gaza.
He expressed support for UNRWA, noting that “in the absence of a political solution, it represents the only institutional support that ensures minimal stability and dignity in the region.” Highlighting the “harrowing experience” of Junior Nzita Nsuami, a Congolese child abducted alongside his friends in 1996 at the age of 12 and recruited to become a child soldier, he asked: “How is it possible that in a world of such extraordinary progress, there is still a generation of children born and raised by war?” He pointed out further that child protection must not be limited to geography, as in this digital age, new risks and threats confront children.
His country has decided therefore to be part of the New York Declaration for the Protection of Children Online. He said that as the 30th anniversary of the Beijing Declaration provides an opportunity to advance women’s rights and address social gaps between them and their male counterparts, “the time has come to see a woman as the Secretary General of this Organization.” He highlighted the tourism potential of his country and underlined the partnership between its Ministry of Tourism and Trade and World Tourism Organization geared towards developing legislation that emphasizes governance, sector training, digitalization and sustainability. “It is a shared commitment to make our country a benchmark in sustainability,” he said.
Noting that the international financial system must be able to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable States, he called for “a deep and inclusive reform of the international financial architecture, in order to build a more just and representative global financial system”. Further, he highlighted the imperative of protecting linguistic and cultural diversity, to build bridges and synergies, stating that: “Multilingualism is not only a symbolic richness; it is a condition for truly equitable participation within the multilateral system.”
Trinidad and Tobago: Kamla Persad-Bissessar, Prime Minister
Kamla Persad-Bissessar, Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, stated: “The notion that the Caribbean is a ‘zone of peace’ has become a false ideal.” For too many in the region, peace is “an elusive promise glimpsed, never grasped”. In 2024, Trinidad and Tobago, a nation of 1.4 million, recorded 623 murders — 41 per 100,000 — over 40 per cent gang-related, driven by narcotics and firearms. In the last 25 years, the country has experienced over 10,000 murders — equivalent to losing 1 per cent of the adult population. She therefore noted that President Donald Trump’s comments on the relentless narco- and human trafficking, organized crime and illegal immigration “are correct”.
Welcoming legal immigration, she said that “illegal immigration neglects all checks and balances and will only create long-term disorder” as most will not assimilate into their adopted societies — inevitably leading to greater poverty, crime and cultural antagonism. “This, then, is not phobia or hyperbole; it is simply the stark, naked truth,” she said. Recent increased protections at the United States southern border have rerouted illegal migration of drug cartels and criminal gangs “into the Eastern Caribbean”, she noted — voicing gratitude for United States military presence in the Southern Caribbean, inhibiting drug cartels in her country. Unless forceful and aggressive actions are taken, “evil drug cartels will continue their societal destruction”, believing affected nations will unreservedly subscribe to morals and ethics “which they themselves blatantly flout”, she said. “We will fight fire with fire within the law,” she affirmed.
Citing the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 2025 World Drug Report, she recalled how the global drug economy destabilizes institutions, corrodes democracy and undermines development. “The cartels and the Governments that enable them are taking us for fools,” she stressed — and nowhere is this warning more explicit than in Haiti, where armed gangs, political collapse and food insecurity converged to overwhelm democracy and create a protracted emergency. Commending Kenya for leading the Multinational Security Support Mission, she urged the international community to support the United States and Panama’s proposed Gang Suppression Force to deploy a 5,500-member force to “subdue the gangs and restore order in Haiti”.
On climate, she stressed that developed countries “should not force-feed a climate agenda onto developing countries and blackmail them into cooperation”. Adding “insult” to injury, many of those States supporting imposition of the aggressive climate agenda “actually achieved developed-nation status and prosperity through highly environmentally destructive and polluting industries”, she said. While there is indeed room for renewable energy, fossil fuels remain “essential for our continued survival”. Her Government will, “within reason”, support protecting the environment for future generations; but independent nations must create climate policy balancing development goals and poverty eradication policies with environmental protection. “Trinidad and Tobago may be small in size, but we are large in conviction,” she stressed. “Let us listen to each other with an objective mindset” as peace and prosperity require honest, sometimes uncomfortable decisions.
Antigua and Barbuda: Gaston Browne, Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, Corporate Governance and Public Private Partnerships
Gaston Browne, Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, Corporate Governance and Public Private Partnerships of Antigua and Barbuda, said his small State has one of the fastest-growing economies in the Caribbean and a high level of human development. Yet “it owes little to the global financial system, and even less to the global effort to curb climate change”, he said, which have not helped achieve the transformation they promoted. “While my small country readily agrees that the nations of this world would be ‘better together’, as this year’s theme proclaims, we must also remind this Assembly that eighty years after the Charter, ‘better together’ remains an aspiration,” he added.
The world’s retreat from multilateralism and tenets of international law means this is the moment to “resummon all nations to the purposes and principles of the Charter set down eighty years ago”, he said. “Without international cooperation, universal peace will not be achieved. What humanity needs at this time is not only peace, but compassion, solidarity, justice and love reigning in our hearts.” Turning to the climate crisis, he said the Government supports a just, orderly energy transition that caps, then fairly phases down and ultimately phases out the fuels that drive the sustained high emissions without sacrificing energy security or development.
The ocean, which “is not scenery” but the source of food, jobs and development for the region, must be protected with robust global plastics and fossil fuel non-proliferation treaties and expanded blue-carbon finance for mangroves and seagrass. Until independent science proves no serious harm, Antigua and Barbuda supports a moratorium on seabed mining. “No one should mortgage the ocean floor to pay short-term bills,” he added. Last year, the international community came to Antigua and Barbuda for the Fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States and adopted the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS — a 10-year contract for resilient prosperity. “If ‘better together’ means anything, it means delivering where need is greatest and fiscal space narrowest,” he added.
Turning to regional issues, he said Antigua and Barbuda supports a single, Haitian-led plan, executed under a single Council mandate and financed through a single, transparent Haiti Fund. It would align the United Nations, the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) behind one budgeted programme with public accountability. Disbursements should follow results such as: roads retaken from gang control, extortion stopped, arms and illicit finance interdicted, civilians protected and essential services restored. Addressing the conduct of counter-narcotics operations in the Caribbean Sea, he said the fight against drug trafficking must rest on cooperation and law. “We remind everyone that our hemisphere should be respected as a zone of peace, not a theatre of military conflict,” he said.
Fiji: Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Civil Service and Public Enterprises, and Information
This year, Fiji commemorates 50 years of independence, its Prime Minister, Sitiveni Ligamamada Rabuka, said, calling attention to the “Ocean of Peace” declaration adopted by the leaders of the Pacific, as well as the “Pacific way”, a phrase coined by Fiji’s first Prime Minister to describe the calm and orderly way in which Pacific island States worked towards their independence. However, his region has been a theatre for two world wars and a testing ground for deadly weapons. Also noting the many conflicts around the world, he said the UN must address the root causes of instability with the same urgency that it addresses its consequences. Sustained peace is only possible with prosperity, he said, adding that his Government’s full attention is directed at poverty alleviation.
On climate change, the Prime Minister stressed: “Science is clear, the powerful G20 Group has been responsible for 80 per cent of total emissions.” Therefore, they must lead the charge — keeping with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, he said, stressing the importance of a Loss and Damage Fund that meets the scale of the challenge. “We continue to reward polluters who wreck our planet,” he pointed out, noting that the fossil fuel industry continues to pocket massive profits and subsidies, while “everyday people bear the costs of climate catastrophe — from rising insurance premiums to lost livelihoods.” The July 2025 International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion on Climate Change affirms this — countries that are liable for climate change damage must bear the full cost.
Highlighting Fiji’s foreign policy priority of “family first Pacific regionalism”, he said his Government is looking at ways to host those island communities that may find it impossible to remain on their islands. Stressing the need for a legal definition for such communities, he said that to date, they are merely referred to as “displaced people”. “In the Pacific, where over 90 per cent of land is communally owned, those that are being displaced will be landless before they become stateless, stripping them further of their dignity,” he noted. Fiji is facing the reality of “sovereignty within sovereignty” and setting the precedent for this complex, sensitive and costly work. He also called for urgent efforts to address plastic pollution, conserve biodiversity and protect endangered species.
The existing financing architecture systemically disadvantages small island developing States through complex processes and lengthy approvals, he pointed out. “As a small economy, we need direct funding access modalities, simplified procedures and small island developing States-specific funding windows,” he said, also highlighting the importance of the of the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index. Fiji is also pursuing constitutional reform, and has established a Truth and Reconciliation Page Commission to provide a platform for all voices, particularly those affected by its past upheavals. The country is also finalizing arrangements for “a purpose-built UN House” that will provide a functional platform for the Organization’s operations.
Tuvalu: Feleti Teo, Prime Minister
Feleti Teo, Prime Minister of Tuvalu, said “the UN’s enduring presence is a testament to the transformative power of unity and the remarkable achievements made possible when nations join forces in a spirit of cooperation and unity of purpose.” However, achieving peace, security and sustainable development will be of little value “if the poor and the most vulnerable are left behind”. Noting that climate change and sea-level rise pose the greatest security threats to his country, he reiterated his “strong international advocation for the special case of Tuvalu as the most vulnerable of the most vulnerable countries” to the phenomena.
He welcomed the recent advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea Convention regarding the obligations of States in relation to climate change. These opinions, he noted, did not only affirm the principles of statehood continuity and the permanency of duly demarcated maritime boundaries, they transform political commitments to legally binding obligations. “It is my hope that the urgency to address the existential threat of climate change and sea-level rise would not be overshadowed by the ongoing geopolitical competition between the superpowers and the military conflicts around the globe,” he stressed.
Supporting the Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty initiative to phase out the use of fossil fuel, he called on all nations “that are serious about confronting the climate crisis to join this initiative and to act decisively to protect our planet and future generations”. He noted that the session’s theme is more than a watchword, but a strong affirmation of partnership amid heightened challenges to multilateralism, emphasizing that: “Genuine and durable partnership is not a choice but a necessity.” And because GDP alone does not reflect vulnerability, he urged international financial institutions to reconsider eligibility criteria that prevent vulnerable countries from accessing support.
On gender equality, in the context of the 30th anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Beijing Declaration and Plan of Action, he highlighted that women’s rights are at the same time human rights and a foundation for sustainable development, peace and resilience. Accordingly, Tuvalu women “are not only included, but are leading in decision-making spaces, from village councils to global negotiations”. Likewise, young people, through deliberately engineered conditions, must be allowed to realize their full potential as innovators and active change agents in achieving the SDGs. Further, he called for the admission of Taiwan into the UN and its agencies, and for the lifting of sanctions against Cuba, as well as its delisting as a State sponsor of terrorism.
Tonga:‘Aisake Valu Eke, Prime Minister
‘Aisake Valu Eke, Prime Minister of Tonga, welcomed the UN80 reform process as an opportunity to ensure the United Nations remains fit for purpose — just as the Pacific undertakes its own Review of the Regional Architecture under the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. “For us, reform is not abstract — it is about survival, dignity, fairness and efficiency”, he stated. This means anchoring regional integrated platforms within the Pacific Islands Forum, ensuring financing flows respond to regionally determined priorities, safeguarding access for the smallest administrations, easing reporting burdens and above all, increasing Pacific representation across the UN system.
For Tonga, climate change “is not a remote threat”, he stressed, “but an unfolding reality that threatens to erase decades of development gains — and imperils the very existence of our islands”. Calling for urgent, ambitious, and concrete climate action grounded in common but differentiated responsibilities, he voiced support for Australia’s bid to host the COP31. Scheduled to be held in partnership with the Pacific as a PACIFIC-COP, he called it “a unique opportunity to bring the voices of small island developing States to the forefront of the global climate agenda”.
He welcomed the landmark Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on 23 July — a historic decision affirming that “climate change is not only an environmental crisis but also a profound challenge to international law, human rights and the very survival of small island nations”. For Tonga, this was a moral victory that amplifies the voices of the world’s most vulnerable, strengthens the call for urgent action to cut emissions and accelerate adaptation. Further, it urges delivering on loss and damage finance, and reinforces the shared duty to secure climate justice, resilience and protection for present and future generations.
He recalled the UN Ocean Conference, underscoring the centrality of sustainable ocean-based economies to Pacific island countries that “rely on the ocean for food security, trade, and culture”. The Conference called for integrated ocean governance, stronger financing for marine conservation, resilient maritime infrastructure and “sustainable transport across our islands”. At home, Tonga has taken concrete steps with the Ocean Management Bill 2025 — a landmark framework to conserve biodiversity, manage resources sustainably, and protect the marine environment. Tonga further joined the Pacific family in the adoption of the Ocean of Peace Declaration, “declaring the Blue Pacific Continent as an Ocean of Peace”. The ocean “must not only be protected — it must be honoured as a foundation of our security, of our economies, our way of life — our legacy of resilience”, he stressed.
Samoa: Toelupe Poumulinuku Onesemo, Deputy Prime Minister
Toelupe Poumulinuku Onesemo, Deputy Prime Minister of Samoa, reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to the UN as the premier forum to address global challenges. “Multilateralism for Samoa is a practical necessity and not just an abstract ideal,” he said. “Only through genuine cooperation and mutual trust can we craft solutions that no single nation could achieve alone.” While welcoming the UN80 initiative, he said any reform must strengthen delivery on the ground, especially for small islands developing States, by eliminating duplication, improving coherence and accelerating impact. Such reforms must not weaken the operations of the UN multi-country offices or the Resident Coordinator system.
Samoa’s geographical isolation and insularity no longer protects it from increasingly complex and dynamic security challenges, he said. The reality of climate change and increased severity of disasters mean many Samoan communities are at risk of losing traditional homelands as shorelines are washed away and inland communities experience landslides. The sustained international inaction detrimentally impacts all aspects of Samoan life. “Climate change remains the greatest existential threat to Samoa and other Pacific SIDS,” he said. As the international community approaches COP30, he urged the 35 countries responsible for 86 per cent of global emissions to be “part of the solution, not the problem”. New Nationally Determined Contributions must reflect maximum ambition and include a 50 per cent reduction in global emissions by 2030.
Urging the world to witness firsthand the consequences of climate change in the Pacific, Samoa supports Australia’s bid to host COP31 on behalf of the Blue Pacific continent. The Pacific Ocean must be sustainably managed as economic growth has gravely cost marine ecosystems. “Coupled with the unchecked exploitation of deep seabed mineral resources, our oceans face a crisis of limitless proportions,” he said. Through its Samoa Ocean Strategy, his Government completed and legally adopted a Marine Spatial Plan, which helps implement its commitment to protect 30 per cent, and manage 100 per cent, of its ocean by 2030. Climate finance acts as the bridge from ambition to action and must be scaled up and responsive to the needs of small islands developing States. “This way, the climate funds end up in the villages and communities, that need it the most,” he added.
Zimbabwe: Amon Murwira, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Trade
“No nation can prosper in isolation,” Amon Murwira, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Zimbabwe, said, reaffirming Zimbabwe’s commitment to multilateralism. Also welcoming the UN80 initiative, he said that any reform that sidelines the aspirations of the Global South will run contrary to the UN Charter. The reform process must be Member State-driven and inclusive. The global economic, political and security architecture established after the Second World War does not reflect contemporary reality, he said, noting that his country was a mere colony when the United Nations was established. Echoing fellow African countries’ call for more representation at the Council, he said decisions on Africa cannot continue to be made without Africa at the table. “We cannot go back to 1884 when Africa was on the menu,” he said.
The women, peace and security as well as the youth, peace and security agendas are crucial to sustainable peace, he said, adding that Zimbabwe has spearheaded diplomatic efforts under the auspices of the SADC for resolving the conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Zimbabwean peacekeepers have displayed a high degree of professionalism where they have been deployed, he said, noting that his country hopes to share its experiences and has put forward its candidature for a non-permanent seat on the Council for the 2027-28 term. “Zimbabwe was born out of a protracted liberation struggle,” he added — hence its solidarity with the people of Palestine and Western Sahara.
Also highlighting Zimbabwe’s doctrine of leaving no one behind, he said the country is transforming the country “brick by brick, stone by stone” through investments in fields ranging from mining to tourism. Development efforts also encompass the empowerment of women and the inclusion of people with disability. The country is focusing on renewable sources of energy and investing in climate-smart agricultural techniques. The international community must implement the Awaza Programme of Action and the Seville Commitment, he said. Condemning all unilateral measures imposed on his country, he called for their unconditional removal and highlighted the “human cost of sanctions”.
New Zealand: Winston Peters, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister for Racing and Minister for Rail
Winston Peters, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister for Racing and Minister for Rail of New Zealand, observed that it has never “been more apparent just how much political leadership is required to respond to the international challenges we face”. Meanwhile, the international order continues along its “malignant path” as it shifts from rules-based to power-based. This is particularly troubling and costly for his country — a small State — which has, for the past 80 years, depended on a functioning multilateral system. Therefore, the United Nations’ reforms efforts must be bold and match the scale of its structural, fiscal and geopolitical challenges.
Spotlighting the conflicts in Sudan, Syria, Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where millions of people in each country have been displaced and require urgent humanitarian aid, he noted that the numbers which are mind-numbing make a statement that “in too many places our shared humanity is held in contempt, or worse”. On the war in Gaza — “the edge of a horrible abyss” — while New Zealand strongly condemns the 7 October 2023 attacks and believes Hamas has no place in a future Palestinian State, Israel’s response has been “grossly disproportionate”. And recognizing a Palestinian State is, for his country, a matter “uniquely complicated given it is embedded in a seemingly intractable, never-ending conflict situation”, he said.
Noting that Palestinian statehood recognition will at present be “open to political manipulation by both Hamas and Israel”, he pointed out his country’s dilemma in that regard: the former will portray such recognition as victory while the latter will view it as a reward. “We are not ready to make that gesture,” he said, adding: “Rather, the New Zealand Government believes that it has one opportunity to recognize Palestinian statehood, and it would make better sense to do so when conditions offer greater prospects for peace and negotiation than at present.”
Côte d’Ivoire: Kacou Houadja Léon Adom, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Integration and Ivorians Abroad
Kacou Houadja Léon Adom, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Integration and Ivorians Abroad, of Côte d’Ivoire, celebrated “two illustrious sons of the African continent”, Secretaries-General Boutros-Boutros Ghali and Kofi Annan, who “radically transformed” the Organization. Describing an institution “at a cross‑roads”, he emphasized a crisis of trust and the weakening of multilateralism, calling on Member States to “revive solidarity”. He decried the paralysis of the Security Council, which “confines the United Nations and regional organizations to powerlessness”, pushing away any prospect for lasting resolution of global conflicts and threats to international peace and security. Faced with the impasse in the negotiation process for several decades, he reiterated a call for Council reform, above all granting Africa its rightful place across all categories.
He further urged for reform of the Bretton Woods institutions and, more broadly, the global financial architecture. Welcoming Africa’s entry into the Group of 20 as “a major step forward”, he called for mobilization of bilateral and multilateral partners in order to address the severe decline in resources devoted to financing development, particularly in the countries of the South. He expressed recognition and gratitude to the United Nations, which, through the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), has significantly contributed to the country’s return to peace after a decade of sociopolitical crisis. Côte d'Ivoire is now a secure country that welcomes, in decent conditions of dignity, several thousand people fleeing terrorist attacks in the Sahel region.
Economically, GDP growth “is dynamic” in Côte d’Ivoire, putting it in the top three countries in the world having recorded the most significant progress on the global index of Sustainable Development Goals, between 2015 and 2024 — the country with the strongest improvement in Africa, reaching fourth place on the world’s Human Development Index. The political environment is peaceful, thanks to important reforms to modernize political life — which allow political parties and civil society to freely conduct their work throughout the national territory. The human rights situation is “satisfactory”, he noted, and being consolidated thanks to the reaffirmed independence of the judiciary, the strengthening of the regulative and institutional framework, and streamlined access to justice. The country now intends to lock in democratic values and consolidate institutions.
Bahrain: Abdullatif bin Rashid Al Zayani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
Abdullatif bin Rashid Al Zayani, Bahrain’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, said this Assembly session coincides with his country’s election as a non-permanent member of the Council for the next two years. Its role as host of the upcoming Gulf Cooperation Council Summit in December reinforces “its role as a key partner in advancing regional and international peace, security and coexistence.” He outlined several pillars for a vision of global peace, coexistence and prosperity aligned with the principles of the UN Charter and international law, the first being a commitment to peaceful solutions to conflicts, especially in the Middle East.
This commitment includes a call for a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, the protection of civilians, the release of hostages and detainees, advancing the sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and other actions. “My country warns of the repercussions of the war in Gaza on regional stability and global interests,” he said, condemning the Israeli attack on Qatar. He also called for negotiations and diplomatic solutions as the path to resolving the Palestinian issue in line with international law and the Charter. He urged the international community to respond to the initiative of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa endorsed by the thirty-third Arab Summit, the “Bahrain Summit”, which called for an international peace conference in the Middle East.
Another pillar, he continued, is the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance, coexistence and dialogue between religions and cultures, in line with the principles of the Kingdom of Bahrain Declaration. A third pillar of its vision relates to strengthening international strategic partnerships for security, peace and prosperity. The fourth pillar reaffirms Bahrain’s commitment to strengthening international cooperation for sustainable development and humanitarian solidarity, including tackling poverty around the world. Proud of its cooperation with the UN, Bahrain reaffirms its commitment “to sharing its experience as a leading model of reform and constant development, legislative modernization and a homeland of tolerance, coexistence, religious freedom and humanitarian work”, he said.
Venezuela: Yvan Gil Pinto, Minister of the People's Power for Foreign Affairs
“The first ships that arrived on our Caribbean coasts came to bring us under control,” said Yvan Gil Pinto, Venezuela’s Minister of the People's Power for Foreign Affairs, noting that this was the beginning of a long struggle of resistance against colonialism. Three centuries later, the liberating army — made of Black people, Indigenous people, white people and mestizos — rose up to free South America. Venezuela is a country “that learned to struggle for its own destiny”, he said, recalling the early twentieth-century coup d’état against General Cipriano Castro, financed by oil companies and the United States Government, followed by puppet Governments that plunged Venezuela into repression for decades. But in 1999, the Venezuelan people led by Commander Hugo Chávez, carried out a peaceful and democratic revolution. Today, Venezuela’s emancipation project, as reaffirmed by multiple electoral events, is led by President Nicolás Maduro, he said.
“War has been waged upon us in many forms,” he said. Condemning the “regime change” aggressions against his country over the past decade, the 1,042 sanctions imposed on it and “now an absolutely illegal and completely immoral military threat”, he denounced this attempt to bring war to the Caribbean and South America. Thanking the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), BRICS (Brazil, Russian Federation, India and China) and the Non-Aligned Movement for their solidarity, he said the United States is targeting Venezuela’s incalculable oil and gas wealth. The people of the United States have also been betrayed by their Governments who are waging war instead of solving the poverty, inequality and unemployment that characterize that country.
Reaffirming Venezuela’s right to defend its sovereignty, he said his country will work towards a multipolar world without colonial empires. Recalling President Chavez’s founding of Petrocaribe, the Union of South American Nations and Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), he said: “We are not intimidated by threats, lies or cannons.” He also expressed solidarity with the heroic people of Palestine, condemned the attacks on Iran, and demanded the lifting of the blockade on Cuba and the removal of unilateral coercive measures against Belarus, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iran and Zimbabwe. Venezuela has never been a threat to any nation, he said, adding that it will continue to work toward a world where colonialism and slavery are vanquished forever and where humanity can be human.
Mauritius: Dhananjay Ramful, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Cooperation and International Trade
Dhananjay Ramful, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Cooperation and International Trade of Mauritius, said while the UN’s achievements over the last eight decades are testaments to what can be done together in good faith and with a common purpose, sadly “hundreds of millions of our fellow humans living in conflict zones, subject to violations of their human rights,” continually suffer. The winds of conflict blowing across virtually all continents represent humanity’s failure to protect its most vulnerable. To be continually relevant, multilateralism must respond to the needs of all, particularly the Global South, he said.
Calling for a “more efficient and effective Organization”, he welcomed the UN80 initiative, describing it as an opportunity to reimagine the future of international cooperation. He urged Security Council reform — essential to global emancipation — with permanent seats for Africa and India. Turning to climate change, he urged Member States to translate the legal obligations drawing from the International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion into concrete climate action and greater support for the most vulnerable nations, stressing: “The international community should ensure that the assistance that we need for adaptation, mitigation and building our resilience are made available.”
“The transformative potential of AI and digital technologies are undeniable; but they also represent real challenges for contemporary society,” he stated as he called for a global governance architecture to ensure safe, ethical and inclusive use of these technologies. Further, he committed to support regional cooperation as well as the pooling of efforts of the countries bordering the Indian Ocean for the benefit of all. “This is our regional version of ‘Better Together’,” he said, expressing pride in Mauritius’ hosting of the headquarters of the Indian Ocean Commission and the Association of Indian Ocean Rim Countries.
Togo: Robert Komlan Edo Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and Togolese Abroad of Togo
Robert Komlan Edo Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and Togolese Abroad of Togo, commended the Secretary-General’s efforts to revitalize the UN, whose effectiveness is threatened by the return of unilateralism and the law of force. “In an international context of extreme confusion, where everything is upside down, it is not easy to be Secretary-General of the United Nations,” he said. “That is why Togo gives you its full support.” He then detailed his country’s significant progress in recent years as it implemented the Global Goals. “The Government has made the 2030 Agenda not just a reference framework, but the true compass of public policies,” he said.
More than 70 per cent of the SDG targets are now integrated into national strategies, particularly through the Government’s 2020-2025 roadmap, he said. This roadmap is based on four essential pillars: social, economic, environmental and governance. Citing examples, he said 90.7 per cent of the country had geographical accessibility to healthcare in 2023, up from 19.3 per cent in 2020; and 86 per cent of the people had access to drinking water in 2024, up from 26 per cent in 2020. Yet, while Togo modernizes and looks confidently to the future, “the efforts made in this way are not immune to the terrorist threats that weigh on the Sahel and the whole of West Africa”, he added.
Noting the African Union’s 2025 theme is "Justice for Africans and people of African descent through reparations”, he added: “There is a bitter thirst for justice on the African continent.” The continent seeks reparations for four centuries of the transatlantic slave trade and decades of colonialism. The Second Africa-CARICOM Summit reaffirmed these countries’ determination to use their partnership to seek reparative justice for Africans and people of African descent. He invoked slavery and colonialism to build a future of justice and equality for all. He also called for Africa’s depiction on world maps to be corrected to represent its full size, stressing: “Geography must be decolonized”. The United Nations should use its credibility to describe the transatlantic slave trade, colonization, slavery and deportation not only as crimes against humanity, but — and above all — as genocide against the peoples of Africa.
Right of Reply: Iran, India, Guatemala and Pakistan
The representative of Iran, speaking in exercise of the right of reply, called it “regrettable for the United Nations, for humanity and for the cause of justice that an individual who is wanted by the International Criminal Court has been granted the opportunity to address this esteemed body”. He stressed that it is “preposterous that a regime that persistently violates each and every principle of this Organization is allowed to lecture this body instead of being expelled per Article 6 of the Charter of the United Nations”.
The “Israeli regime is inherently founded on aggression”, occupation, Apartheid and terror, he said, calling for it to be compelled to stop immediately and permanently all its attacks on Gaza, the West Bank, Lebanon and Syria, Yemen, and other parts of the region. He further condemned the 12-day aggression against his country in June and against its exclusively peaceful nuclear programme.
The representative of India condemned the “absurd theatrics” from the Prime Minister of Pakistan, who “once again glorified terrorism that is so central to their foreign policy”. She stressed that “no degree of drama and no level of lies can conceal the facts this is the very same Pakistan” which shielded the Resistance Front, a Pakistani-sponsored terror outfit, from the responsibility of carrying out the “barbaric massacre of tourists in the Indian union territory of Jammu and Kashmir”. A country “long steeped in the tradition of deploying and exporting terrorism has no shame in advancing the most ludicrous narratives to that end”, she said. Pakistan must immediately shut down all terrorist camps and hand over those wanted in India.
The representative of Guatemala, responding to comments made earlier today by Prime Minister John Briceño of Belize, said her country is committed to the principles of the UN Charter, respect for international law and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Guatemala submitted to the International Court of Justice its island and maritime territorial claims to Belize; oral hearings will be held next year. Guatemala is committed to obeying the Court’s ruling and to strengthening bilateral relations with Belize.
The representative of Pakistan responded to “a State that cannot decide whether to masquerade as the world’s largest democracy or expose itself as the world’s largest factory of disinformation”. India, she said, has become the only country that practices State-sponsored terrorism as policy at home and abroad. Condemning that State’s “reign of terror in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir”, she affirmed that her country “is committed to peaceful coexistence, mutual respect and regional stability”. However, India has no license to “violate our territorial integrity and sovereignty and kill innocent civilians”, and if aggression is “imposed on us, we will respond”, she stressed.
Follow our live coverage of the General Assembly here.
